//frailty AND "renal"
//("frailty"[MeSH Terms] OR "frailty"[All Fields]) AND "renal"[All Fields]

1. Clin Kidney J. 2019 Feb;12(1):110-112. doi: 10.1093/ckj/sfz001. Epub 2019 Feb 5.

Sarcopenia in CKD: a roadmap from basic pathogenetic mechanisms to clinical
trials.

Ortiz A(1), Sanchez-Niño MD(1).

Author information: 
(1)IIS-Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, School of Medicine, Universidad Autonoma de
Madrid; Fundacion Renal Iñigo Alvarez de Toledo-IRSIN and REDINREN, Madrid,
Spain.

Sarcopenia and frailty are recognized as key risk factors for adverse outcomes in
patients on renal replacement therapy or with non-dialysis chronic kidney disease
(CKD). However, there is still debate about their pathogenesis and, thus, about
the best therapeutic approaches, as well as the impact on outcomes of current
approaches based on different exercise programmes. In the past two issues of
Clinical Kidney Journal, several manuscripts address the issue of sarcopenia in
CKD from the point of view of pathogenesis and new therapeutic approaches,
monitoring of results, implementation of exercise programmes and specific
potential benefits of exercise programmes in dialysis and non-dialysis CKD
patients, as assessed by clinical trials.

DOI: 10.1093/ckj/sfz001 
PMCID: PMC6366131
PMID: 30746137 


2. Drugs. 2019 Feb 11. doi: 10.1007/s40265-019-1061-4. [Epub ahead of print]

The Impact of Comorbidities on the Pharmacological Management of Type 2 Diabetes 
Mellitus.

Hussain S(1), Chowdhury TA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Metabolism, Barts and the London School of Medicine
and Dentistry, The Royal London Hospital, 7th Floor, John Harrison House,
Whitechapel, London, E1 1BB, UK.
(2)Department of Diabetes and Metabolism, Barts and the London School of Medicine
and Dentistry, The Royal London Hospital, 7th Floor, John Harrison House,
Whitechapel, London, E1 1BB, UK. Tahseen.Chowdhury@bartshealth.nhs.uk.

Diabetes mellitus affects over 20% of people aged > 65 years. With the population
of older people living with diabetes growing, the condition may be only one of a 
number of significant comorbidities that increases the complexity of their care, 
reduces functional status and inhibits their ability to self-care. Coexisting
comorbidities may compete for the attention of the patient and their healthcare
team, and therapies to manage comorbidities may adversely affect a person's
diabetes. The presence of renal or liver disease reduces the types of
antihyperglycemic therapies available for use. As a result, insulin and
sulfonylurea-based therapies may have to be used, but with caution. There may be 
a growing role for sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 (SGLT-2) inhibitors in
diabetic renal disease and for glucagon-like peptide (GLP)-1 therapy in renal and
liver disease (nonalcoholic steatohepatitis). Cancer treatments pose considerable
challenges in glucose therapy, especially the use of cyclical chemotherapy or
glucocorticoids, and cyclical antihyperglycemic regimens may be required.
Clinical trials of glucose lowering show reductions in microvascular and, to a
lesser extent, cardiovascular complications of diabetes, but these benefits take 
many years to accrue, and evidence specifically in older people is lacking.
Guidelines recognize that clinicians managing patients with type 2 diabetes
mellitus need to be mindful of comorbidity, particularly the risks of
hypoglycemia, and ensure that patient-centered therapeutic management of diabetes
is offered. Targets for glucose control need to be carefully considered in the
context of comorbidity, life expectancy, quality of life, and patient wishes and 
expectations. This review discusses the role of chronic kidney disease, chronic
liver disease, cancer, severe mental illness, ischemic heart disease, and frailty
as comorbidities in the therapeutic management of hyperglycemia in patients with 
type 2 diabetes mellitus.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-019-1061-4 
PMID: 30742277 


3. J Res Health Sci. 2018 Dec 29;18(4):e00433.

Association between Multiple Recurrent Events with Multivariate Modeling: A
Retrospective Cohort Study.

Osmani F(1), Hajizadeh E(2), Rasekhi A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares
University, Tehran, Iran. f.osmani@modares.ac.ir.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares
University, Tehran, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Recurrent event data are often encountered in biomedical research,
for example, recurrent infections or recurrent hospitalizations for patients
after renal transplant. In many studies, there are more than one type of events
of interest. We aimed to identify the association between two types of events
using multivariate joint modeling and then apply this statistical method in the
clinical data set.
STUDY DESIGN: A retrospective cohort study.
METHODS: Overall, 342 subjects with breast cancer whose records were registered
for follow-up in a Cancer Research Center at Shohadaye Tajrish Hospital, Tehran, 
Iran from 2006 to 2015 were investigated. These patients were monitored for at
least 6 months after diagnosis and their latest status were recorded. Joint
frailty model was used for modeling the relationship between two types of
recurrences with Frailty package in R software.
RESULTS: When the terminal event was considered as death, three-year and
five-year survival rates for the patients were 0.79 and 0.68, respectively. Given
the results obtained from a fitted joint frailty model, the risk of multiple
recurrences (local and metastases) increased for the patients with tumor grades
greater than I.
CONCLUSION: With regard to the significant variance of the frailty component of
the metastases event, it can be inferred that patients with the same predictive
variables are prone to different levels of metastases risk and, on the other
hand, given the low frequency of types of recurrences, caution should be
exercised when considering the obtained results.


PMID: 30728319 


4. Aortic Valve Replacement.

Rajput FA(1), Zeltser R(2).
In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2018-.
2019 Jan 29.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin - Madison
(2)Hofstra Northwell School of Medicine

The aortic valve is a semilunar valve with three leaflets, which lies at the
junction of left ventricle and aorta. It allows unidirectional blood flow from
the left ventricle to the aorta and the rest of the body. Because of the highly
complex and sophisticated cellular and molecular functions, the thin valve
leaflet can withstand extreme mechanical and hemodynamic forces with every
cardiac cycle.[1] Various factors including age and congenital defects can
compromise the normal valvular function leading to a wide variety of
complications.[2] Although bicuspid aortic valves (BAV) are the most common
congenital abnormality, congenital valve defects can range from aortic atresia
(missing or incomplete closure of aortic valves) to a sub or supra-valvular
stenosis. BAV is reported to have an incidence of 1 to 2% with a male
predominance. Lack of microfibrillar proteins during valvulogenesis has been
reported to affect the leaflet development where two leaflets are fused to form
one large leaflet. It frequently correlates with aortic abnormalities such as
aortic dilation (root, ascending and arch) and coarctation of the aorta.[3] The
bicuspid aortic valve leaflets can undergo accelerated calcific degeneration
because of abnormal hemodynamic forces. Congenital abnormalities including BAV
can lead to various valvular complications including aortic stenosis and aortic
regurgitation leading to an increased risk to infective endocarditis, which has a
reported incidence of 12 to 39% in BAV.[3] Unless severe, BAV generally remains
asymptomatic till the age of 50 to 60 years. Aortic stenosis (AS) is a narrowing 
of the valve aperture reducing the aortic valve area. Increased resistance to
blood flow and transvalvular pressure gradient causes increased left ventricle
workload causing hypertrophy. Its prevalence increases with age and can be as
high as 4.6% in people greater than age 75 years. Being the most common valvular 
disease in Europe and America, estimates are that 3.5 million people in England
alone will have AS by the year 2020.[4] Calcific degeneration leading to
stiffening and restriction motion of valve leaflet is the most common cause of
AS. Disruption of endothelium lining on the aortic side caused by increased
mechanical stress seem to be the inciting event. Posterior leaflets are
reported to be affected the most.[5] Rheumatic fever causing inflammation of the 
leaflets is still the leading cause of AS in developing countries. AS can be
asymptomatic or can cause symptoms of syncope, angina and heart
failure.[6] Severe AS is fatal with a 50% mortality at 2 years.[7] As per The
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) guidelines,
AS is graded severe when the orifice area is less than 1.0 cm, the mean gradient 
is greater than 40 mmHg or the jet velocity is greater than 4 m/s. Prognosis is
poor in symptomatic or severe cases unless the valve is replaced. Up to 30% of
patients aged > 75 do not undergo surgical valve replacement either because of
technical reasons; this may include porcelain aorta, general frailty, refusal to 
undergo surgery, and serious comorbid conditions.[8] The operative death risk for
surgical aortic valve replacement (SAVR) is as high as 10% in patients with LV
dysfunction, chronic renal disease, and advanced age.[9] Trans-catheter aortic
valve replacement and trans-catheter aortic valve implantation (TAVR/TAVI) have
emerged as a more feasible and less risky option for patients not suitable for
surgery. Aortic regurgitation (AR) is the backflow of blood from the aorta to the
left ventricle when the valve leaflets fail to coapt. Common causes include
congenital defects, calcific degeneration, infective endocarditis, rheumatic
fever, and trauma.[10][11][12][13] Ventricular hypertrophy in chronic cases
accommodates increased volume to maintain the normal stroke volume and
end-diastolic pressure; hence, chronic AR can be asymptomatic for decades.[14] In
contrast, with acute cases of AR, ventricles do not have enough time to undergo
the needed changes such as hypertrophy to accommodate increased volumes. Because 
of decreased stroke volume, the heart rate increases to maintain cardiac output
but is insufficient to meet the demand resulting in increased left atrial
pressure, pulmonary edema and cardiogenic shock. On physical examination, AR
murmur is blowing, high-pitched, diastolic, and decrescendo, beginning soon after
the aortic component of S (A); it is loudest at the 3rd or 4th left parasternal
intercostal space. It also has associations with various other murmurs including:
“Mid-systolic murmur” because of rapid ejection of an overload of blood from the 
left ventricle, “Austin Flint” murmur is mid-to-late diastolic murmur due
to partial closure of mitral valve during ventricular systole because of
regurgitant flow from aortic valve, “Cole-Cecil” is a diastolic murmur due to the
fusion of an aortic murmur with the S3 because of simultaneous filling of the
left ventricle from left atrium and AR. History of valvular surgery Dr. Theodore 
Tuffier, in 1912, used his finger to free the fused leaflets of a stenosed aortic
valve.[15] Before the advent of cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB), mitral valve repair
involved commissurotomy through access from the left atrial chamber. Thomas Homes
Sellors performed first pulmonary valvulotomy in 1948 by using a tenotomy
knife.[16] Charles Hufnagel developed the first artificial valve based on a
reciprocating ball and cage. It was used to prevent backflow of blood into the
ventricles due to aortic insufficiency.[17] CPB machine revolutionized the valve 
replacement in the anatomical position. Dr. Dwight Harken and his colleagues
performed the first successful aortic valve replacement. Later that year, Drs.
Albert Starr and Lowell Edwards performed mitral valve replacement.[18]
Bioprosthetic valves are closer in function to natural valves but have a limited 
life expectancy, whereas, Mechanical valves are more durable but require
anticoagulation. The choice of valves, among other factors, depends upon the
patient’s age and well-being. Mechanical heart valves are known to last for
approximately 25 years. Seventy different mechanical heart valves have been
developed since 1960.[19] Ball and cage, bi-leaflet, and tilting disc are the
common ones. Modification of the ball valve by Dr. Albert Starr and Lowell
Edwards entailed developing a cage made of lucite with a silicone elastomer ball.
The cage material was later changed to stainless steel and then cobalt-chromium
alloys. The Starr-Edward valve also has a Teflon sewing ring, which enabled
suturing into mitral and later into the aortic position.[20]  Increased
thrombogenicity has been a significant issue, for which valves underwent several 
modifications such as measures to reduce metal contact by covering the struts
with cloth and using Silastic shields. Other issues included hemolysis due to
excessive rubbing of the ball against the sewing ring and occlusion of coronary
ostia because of high profile. Despite these issues, these valves showed the
feasibility of prosthetic valve enabling Starr-Edwards to draw design criteria.
Basic points included that the valves should be chemically inert, biocompatible, 
a-traumatic to blood, and non-thrombogenic.[21]  In 1965, Kay-Shiley’s
non-rotating disc valve replaced the ball with a single disc but demonstrated
poor hemodynamics and hemolysis and was discontinued. Bjork-Shiley in 1969
developed a tilting-disc valve, which overcame the problems with the single-disc 
valve. Free rotation of disc between metal struts allows it to open by tilting at
a 60-degree angle. Bjork-Shiley replaced the flat with the convexo-concave disc
to create a larger orifice in 1975 but were the object of a recall due to
fracture of welded struts.[22]  Medtronic Hall valve developed by Dr. Karl Hall
and Robert Kaster is the most common tilting disc valve. Perforation in the
middle of the disc served as a guide and an improved tilting angle.[23] In 1977, 
St Jude Medical developed Bi-leaflet valve, which comprised two semi-circular
flaps with hinges close to the center of the orifice. Stagnation of blood flow
leading to thrombus formation around the hinge region was a problem with the
bi-leaflet valve.[15] A newly developed valve resolved this issue with a valve in
which the continuous 360-degree rotation around the central axis of the valve
ensured an even distribution of blood flow and prevent thrombus formation.[16] 
Predisposition for thrombosis, embolism, need for lifelong anticoagulation
therapy are drawbacks of mechanical valves. Bioprosthetic valves can either be an
allograft (cadaver or Ross procedure) or, a xenograft (native or pericardium).
The Ross procedure involves replacing the diseased aortic valve with the
patient’s own pulmonary valve (autograft) and replace the pulmonary valve with
aortic or pulmonary allograft. The pulmonary autograft grows with the patient and
does not induce an immunologic response. The most common xenografts are porcine
aortic valves and bovine pericardial valves. Lonescu-Shiley developed xenograft
valves by using bovine pericardium on a titanium stent in 1971 but was later
withdrawn in 1987 due to structural failure including abrasive tears because of
fabric-tissue interface and leaflet calcification. Carpentier-Edwards bovine
pericardial valve overcame those issues by making some structural modifications, 
like stitching pericardium to the inside of the fabric and using flexible stent
posts. Although biological valves have better hemodynamics compared to mechanical
valves, they have a shorter lifespan because of calcification, which stiffens the
valve leaflets. Tissues engineering, a field in regenerative medicine restores
and maintains the function of living tissues. Skin graft for burn victims is an
example. Tissue engineered heart valves (TEHV) are perceived to be
non-thrombogenic, and infection resistant. With advancement in material science
and culturing techniques, there is the possibility of a TEHV valve that
is capable of growing, remodeling and repairing itself as the patients grow.
Polymeric valves have been around for over 50 years, but because the earlier
versions were prone to calcification and degradation, they were not widely used
and instead only used in bridge devices like artificial hearts and left
ventricular assist devices. Besides the advantage that they can be produced in
various shapes and sizes,[17] they are known to combine the durability of
mechanical valves and the hydrodynamic function of bioprosthetic valves.[18] The 
earliest polymeric valve implanted in a 44-year-old female in 1958 at the mitral 
position was a polyurethane design with Teflon chordae
tendinae.[18][18][24] Polyurethane valves have been found to have better
hemodynamics compared to bioprosthetic valves and a lower incidence of
thrombogenicity than mechanical valves. With advances in material sciences, the
future of polymeric valves seems promising.

PMID: 30725821 


5. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2019 Feb 5. pii: CJN.08240718. doi: 10.2215/CJN.08240718. 
[Epub ahead of print]

Associations between Hemodialysis Facility Practices to Manage Fluid Volume and
Intradialytic Hypotension and Patient Outcomes.

Dasgupta I(1)(2), Thomas GN(2), Clarke J(2), Sitch A(2)(3), Martin J(2), Bieber
B(4), Hecking M(5), Karaboyas A(4), Pisoni R(4), Port F(4), Robinson B(4), Rayner
H(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Renal Medicine, Heartlands Hospital, Birmingham, UK;
Indranil.Dasgupta@heartofengland.nhs.uk.
(2)Institute of Applied Health Research, University of Birmingham, Birmingham,
UK.
(3)National Institute for Health Research, Birmingham Biomedical Research Centre,
University Hospitals Birmingham National Health Service Foundation Trust and
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
(4)Arbor Research Collaborative for Health, Ann Arbor, Michigan; and.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine III, Clinical Division of Nephrology and
Dialysis, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(6)Department of Renal Medicine, Heartlands Hospital, Birmingham, UK.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Fluid overload and intradialytic hypotension are
associated with cardiovascular events and mortality in patients on hemodialysis. 
We investigated associations between hemodialysis facility practices related to
fluid volume and intradialytic hypotension and patient outcomes.
DESIGN, SETTING, PARTICIPANTS, & MEASUREMENTS: Data were analyzed from 10,250
patients in 273 facilities across 12 countries, from phase 4 of the Dialysis
Outcomes and Practice Patterns Study (DOPPS; 2009-2012). Cox regression models
(shared frailty) were used to estimate associations between facility practices
reported by medical directors in response to the DOPPS Medical Directors Survey
and all-cause and cardiovascular mortality and hospitalization, and
cardiovascular events, adjusting for country, age, sex, dialysis vintage,
predialysis systolic BP, cardiovascular comorbidities, diabetes, body mass index,
smoking, residual kidney function, dialysis adequacy, and vascular access type.
RESULTS: Of ten facility practices tested (chosen a priori), having a protocol
that specifies how often to assess dry weight in most patients was associated
with lower all-cause (hazard ratio [HR], 0.78; 99% confidence interval [99% CI], 
0.64 to 0.94) and cardiovascular mortality (HR, 0.72; 99% CI, 0.55 to 0.95).
Routine orthostatic BP measurement to assess dry weight was associated with lower
all-cause hospitalization (HR, 0.86; 99% CI, 0.77 to 0.97) and cardiovascular
events (HR, 0.85; 99% CI, 0.73 to 0.98). Routine use of lower dialysate
temperature to limit or prevent intradialytic hypotension was associated with
lower cardiovascular mortality (HR, 0.76; 99% CI, 0.58 to 0.98). Routine use of
an online volume indicator to assess dry weight was associated with higher
all-cause hospitalization (HR, 1.19; 99% CI, 1.02 to 1.38). Routine use of sodium
modeling/profiling to limit or prevent intradialytic hypotension was associated
with higher all-cause mortality (HR, 1.36; 99% CI, 1.14 to 1.63), cardiovascular 
mortality (HR, 1.34; 99% CI, 1.04 to 1.73), and cardiovascular events (HR, 1.21; 
99% CI, 1.03 to 1.43).
CONCLUSIONS: Hemodialysis facility practices relating to the management of fluid 
volume and intradialytic hypotension are associated with patient outcomes.

Copyright © 2019 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.2215/CJN.08240718 
PMID: 30723164 


6. Front Nutr. 2019 Jan 17;5:140. doi: 10.3389/fnut.2018.00140. eCollection 2018.

Panax ginseng for Frailty-Related Disorders: A Review.

Ogawa-Ochiai K(1), Kawasaki K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Japanese-Traditional (Kampo) Medicine, Kanazawa University
Hospital, Kanazawa, Japan.

This review aims to understand the clinical efficacy of Panax ginseng (PG) for
managing frailty-related disorders by reviewing meta-analyses, systematic
reviews, and randomized clinical trial data. PG is widely used in traditional
medicine, mainly in East Asia. It has traditionally been indicated for the
collapse of qi or for abandoned conditions that manifest as shallow breathing,
shortness of breath, cold limbs, profuse sweating, a low pulse rate, or weakness.
In accordance with these indications, PG is used for managing conditions such as 
aging, inflammation, and cancer. PG is also used in some functional foods or
supplements. Some studies have shown the effects of ginsenosides, which are the
major constituents of PG. With regard to pharmacological activities of ginseng
saponins, it has been presumed that these ginsenosides are metabolized into
active forms by human intestinal microbiota after being taken orally. Therefore, 
we focused on reviewing the data of clinical studies on PG. Although there has
been no study that directly investigated the effect of PG on frailty, a number of
clinical studies have been conducted to investigate the efficacy and safety of PG
and its interactions with other modern ginseng medications and ginseng-containing
formulas. We searched the randomized controlled trial data from 1995 to 2018 and 
reviewed the potential effects of PG on frailty-related disorders. We reviewed
the effects of PG on glucose metabolism, fatigue, hypertension, cardiovascular
disorders, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, renal function, cognitive
function, and immune function. Our review showed some evidence for the usefulness
of ginseng, which suggests that it has the potential to be used for the
management of aging-related and frailty symptoms, such as fatigue and
hypertension. The main limitation of this review is that no study has directly
investigated the effect of PG on frailty. Instead we investigated frailty-related
disorders, and the limitations of the available studies were small sample sizes
and a poor methodological quality; besides, only a few studies targeted elderly
people, and few included placebo controls. Larger, well-designed studies are
needed to determine the effect of PG on frailty in the future.

DOI: 10.3389/fnut.2018.00140 
PMCID: PMC6344463
PMID: 30705884 


7. Cien Saude Colet. 2019 Jan;24(1):137-146. doi: 10.1590/1413-81232018241.04952017.

Survival of elderly outpatients: effects of frailty, multimorbidity and
disability.

[Article in English, Portuguese; Abstract available in Portuguese from the
publisher]

Leme DEDC(1), Thomaz RP(1), Borim FSA(1), Brenelli SL(1), Oliveira DV(1), Fattori
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Gerontologia, Faculdade de Ciências Médicas,
Universidade Estadual de Campinas. R. Tessália Vieira de Camargo 126, Cidade
Universitária Zeferino Vaz. 13083-887 Campinas SP Brasil.
daniel.eduardo.7@hotmail.com.

This study aims to analyze the impact of frailty, multimorbidity and disability
on the survival of elderly people attended in a geriatric outpatient facility,
and identify the clinical risk factors associated with death. It is a
longitudinal study, with 133 elderly people initially evaluated in relation to
frailty, multimorbidity (simultaneous presence of three or more chronic diseases)
and disability in Daily Life Activities. The Kaplan Meier method was used to
analyze survival time, and the Cox regression was used for association of the
clinical factors with death. In follow-up over six years, 21.2% of the
participants died, survival being lowest among those who were fragile (p < 0.05).
The variables frailty (HR = 2.26; CI95%: 1.03-4.93) and Chronic Renal
Insufficiency (HR = 3.00; CI95%: 1.20-7.47) were the factors of highest risk for 
death in the multivariate analysis. Frailty had a negative effect on the survival
of these patients, but no statistically significant association was found in
relation to multimorbidity or disability. Tracking of vulnerabilities in the
outpatient geriatric service is important, due to the significant number of
elderly people with geriatric syndromes that use this type of service, and the
taking of decisions on directions for care of these individuals.

Publisher: O objetivo deste estudo foi analisar o impacto da fragilidade, da
multimorbidade e da incapacidade funcional na sobrevida de idosos assistidos em
ambulatório de geriatria e identificar os fatores clínicos de risco associados ao
óbito. Estudo longitudinal, com 133 idosos avaliados inicialmente em relação à
fragilidade, multimorbidade (presença simultânea de 3 doenças crônicas ou mais) e
perda funcional nas Atividades de Vida Diária. Utilizou-se o método Kaplan Meier,
para a análise de sobrevida, e a regressão de Cox, para a associação dos fatores 
clínicos com o óbito. Após seguimento de seis anos, 21,2% dos participantes
faleceram, sendo a sobrevida menor entre os idosos frágeis (p < 0,05). As
variáveis fragilidade (HR = 2,26; IC95%: 1,03-4,93) e Insuficiência Renal Crônica
(HR = 3,00; IC95%: 1,20-7,47) foram fatores de maiores riscos para óbito na
análise multivariada. A fragilidade impactou negativamente na sobrevida desses
pacientes, porém não foi observada associação estatisticamente significativa em
relação à multimorbidade e perda funcional. O rastreio de vulnerabilidades no
serviço ambulatorial de geriatria é relevante, em virtude do número expressivo de
idosos portadores de síndromes geriátricas que utilizam este tipo de atendimento 
e do direcionamento dos cuidados desses indivíduos.
DOI: 10.1590/1413-81232018241.04952017 
PMID: 30698248 


8. J Cachexia Sarcopenia Muscle. 2019 Jan 29. doi: 10.1002/jcsm.12376. [Epub ahead
of print]

Muscle wasting in patients with end-stage renal disease or early-stage lung
cancer: common mechanisms at work.

Aniort J(1)(2), Stella A(3), Philipponnet C(1)(2), Poyet A(1)(4), Polge C(1),
Claustre A(1), Combaret L(1), Béchet D(1), Attaix D(1), Boisgard S(5), Filaire
M(6), Rosset E(7), Burlet-Schiltz O(3), Heng AE(1)(2), Taillandier D(1).

Author information: 
(1)INRA, Université Clermont Auvergne, UMR 1019, Human Nutrition Unit (UNH), CNRH
Auvergne (Centre de Recherche en Nutrition Humaine d'Auvergne), Clermont-Ferrand,
France.
(2)Nephrology, Dialysis and Transplantation Department, Gabriel Montpied
University Hospital, University Hospital of Clermont-Ferrand, Clermont-Ferrand,
France.
(3)Institut de Pharmacologie et de Biologie Structurale, Université de Toulouse, 
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Université Paul Sabatier, France.
(4)Nephrology Department, Hospital of Roanne, Roanne, France.
(5)Orthopedic Surgery Department, Gabriel Montpied University Hospital,
University Hospital of Clermont-Ferrand, Clermont-Ferrand, France.
(6)Thoracic Surgery Department, Gabriel Montpied University Hospital, University 
Hospital of Clermont-Ferrand, Clermont-Ferrand, France.
(7)Vascular Surgery Department, Gabriel Montpied University Hospital, University 
Hospital of Clermont-Ferrand, Clermont-Ferrand, France.

BACKGROUND: Loss of muscle mass worsens many diseases such as cancer and renal
failure, contributes to the frailty syndrome, and is associated with an increased
risk of death. Studies conducted on animal models have revealed the preponderant 
role of muscle proteolysis and in particular the activation of the ubiquitin
proteasome system (UPS). Studies conducted in humans remain scarce, especially
within renal deficiency. Whether a shared atrophying programme exists
independently of the nature of the disease remains to be established. The aim of 
this work was to identify common modifications at the transcriptomic level or the
proteomic level in atrophying skeletal muscles from cancer and renal failure
patients.
METHODS: Muscle biopsies were performed during scheduled interventions in
early-stage (no treatment and no detectable muscle loss) lung cancer (LC),
chronic haemodialysis (HD), or healthy (CT) patients (n = 7 per group; 86% male; 
69.6 ± 11.4, 67.9 ± 8.6, and 70.2 ± 7.9 years P > 0.9 for the CT, LC, and HD
groups, respectively). Gene expression of members of the UPS, autophagy, and
apoptotic systems was measured by quantitative real-time PCR. A global analysis
of the soluble muscle proteome was conducted by shotgun proteomics for
investigating the processes altered.
RESULTS: We found an increased expression of several UPS and autophagy-related
enzymes in both LC and HD patients. The E3 ligases MuRF1 (+56 to 78%, P < 0.01), 
MAFbx (+68 to 84%, P = 0.02), Hdm2 (+37 to 59%, P = 0.02), and MUSA1/Fbxo30 (+47 
to 106%, P = 0.01) and the autophagy-related genes CTPL (+33 to 47%, P = 0.03)
and SQSTM1 (+47 to 137%, P < 0.01) were overexpressed. Mass spectrometry
identified >1700 proteins, and principal component analysis revealed three
differential proteomes that matched to the three groups of patients. Orthogonal
partial least square discriminant analysis created a model, which distinguished
the muscles of diseased patients (LC or HD) from those of CT subjects. Proteins
that most contributed to the model were selected. Functional analysis revealed up
to 238 proteins belonging to nine metabolic processes (inflammatory response,
proteolysis, cytoskeleton organization, glucose metabolism, muscle contraction,
oxidant detoxification, energy metabolism, fatty acid metabolism, and
extracellular matrix) involved in and/or altered by the atrophying programme in
both LC and HD patients. This was confirmed by a co-expression network analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: We were able to identify highly similar modifications of several
metabolic pathways in patients exhibiting diseases with different aetiologies
(early-stage LC vs. long-term renal failure). This strongly suggests that a
common atrophying programme exists independently of the disease in human.

© 2019 The Authors. Journal of Cachexia, Sarcopenia and Muscle published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of the Society on Sarcopenia, Cachexia and Wasting
Disorders.

DOI: 10.1002/jcsm.12376 
PMID: 30697967 


9. Ann Palliat Med. 2019 Jan 17. pii: apm.2018.12.10. doi: 10.21037/apm.2018.12.10. 
[Epub ahead of print]

Dying well with diabetes.

James J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Leicester Diabetes Centre, Leicester General Hospital, Leicester, LE5 4PW, UK.
june.james@uhl-tr.nhs.uk.

Death is an inevitable part of living. There are undoubtedly clinical and
psychological challenges when any individual is passing from life to death. For a
person with a long-term condition such as diabetes, these challenges can be
compounded and impact on the care and experience of both the individual and their
families and carers. It is estimated that about 500,000 people die each year in
the United Kingdom; of these approximately 75,000 will have diabetes. The vast
majority of people with diabetes who die do not do so as a result of a metabolic 
diabetes emergency such as diabetic ketoacidosis or hyperosmolar hyperglycaemic
state. Whilst diabetes is listed as one of the top 10 causes of death in
developed countries, death occurs more commonly as a result of cardiovascular
disease, dementia, respiratory disease, or cancer. Life-long care of people with 
diabetes centres on glycaemic management and other modifiable clinical elements
such as blood pressure, renal function, and cholesterol. These factors may become
less important to healthcare professionals caring for the individual who is
approaching the end of their life and for safety and holistic reasons clinical
targets may be made more liberal. For the person dying and their families and
carers this may be a difficult concept to accept. This article is based on the
Diabetes UK (2018) Diabetes and End of Life: Clinical Care Recommendations.
Offering a comprehensive guide to the management of diabetes through all the
stages of dying it provides information on hypoglycaemia and hyperglycaemia
prevention and treatment, and the care of people taking glucocorticoid therapy
with a previously known and not known diagnosis of diabetes. Controversial areas 
of care are discussed where there has been no clear consensus.

DOI: 10.21037/apm.2018.12.10 
PMID: 30691282 


10. World J Urol. 2019 Jan;37(1):61-83. doi: 10.1007/s00345-018-2606-y. Epub 2019 Jan
25.

SIU-ICUD consultation on bladder cancer: treatment of muscle-invasive bladder
cancer.

Leow JJ(1), Bedke J(2), Chamie K(3), Collins JW(4)(5), Daneshmand S(6), Grivas
P(7), Heidenreich A(8), Messing EM(9), Royce TJ(10), Sankin AI(11), Schoenberg
MP(11), Shipley WU(12), Villers A(13), Efstathiou JA(14), Bellmunt J(15), Stenzl 
A(16).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Tan Tock Seng Hospital, Singapore, Singapore.
(2)Department of Urology, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(3)Department of Urology and Institute of Urologic Oncology, David Geffen School 
of Medicine at University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery (MMK), Karolinska Institutet,
Solna, Sweden.
(5)Orsi Academy, Melle, Belgium.
(6)USC Institute of Urology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 
USA.
(7)Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA, USA.
(8)Department of Urology, University Hospital of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(9)Department of Urology, University of Rochester Medical Center, University of
Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY, USA.
(10)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(11)Department of Urology, Montefiore Medical Center, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA.
(12)Genitourinary Division, Department of Radiation Oncology, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(13)Department of Urology, University of Lille Nord de France, Lille, France.
(14)Genitourinary Division, Department of Radiation Oncology, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
jefstathiou@partners.org.
(15)PSMAR-IMIM Hospital del Mar Medical Research Institute, Barcelona, Spain.
jbellmunt@imim.es.
(16)Department of Urology, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
arnulf.stenzl@med.uni-tuebingen.de.

PURPOSE: To provide a comprehensive overview and update of the Joint Société
Internationale d'Urologie-International Consultation on Urological Diseases
(SIU-ICUD) Consultation on Bladder Cancer for muscle-invasive presumably
node-negative bladder cancer (MIBC).
METHODS: Contemporary literature was analyzed for the latest evidence in
treatment options, outcomes, including radical surgery, neoadjuvant and adjuvant 
treatment modalities, and bladder-sparing approaches. An international
multi-disciplinary expert panel evaluated and graded the data according to
guidelines from the Oxford Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine.
RESULTS: Radical cystectomy (RC) is the standard of care for MIBC patients
considered to be surgical candidates. While associated with substantial morbidity
and mortality, this has been mitigated with improved technique, minimally
invasive technology, and better perioperative care pathways (e.g., enhanced
recovery after surgery). Neoadjuvant (NA) cisplatin-based combination
chemotherapy improves overall survival and should be offered to eligible ≥ cT2N0 
patients. Adjuvant (Adj) cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy may be
considered, particularly for pT3-4 and/or pN+ disease without prior NA
chemotherapy. Trimodal bladder-preserving treatment via maximum transurethral
resection of bladder tumor followed by concurrent chemoradiation is safe and,
when combined with early salvage RC for recurrence, offers long-term survival
rates in selected patients comparable to RC. Immunotherapy is still experimental 
and is given either alone or in combination with chemotherapy and/or radiation.
CONCLUSION: A multi-disciplinary approach is paramount to achieving optimal
outcomes for MIBC patients, irrespective of their age, performance and
nutritional status, fitness/frailty, renal and other organ function, or disease
severity.

DOI: 10.1007/s00345-018-2606-y 
PMID: 30684034 


11. World Neurosurg. 2019 Jan 11. pii: S1878-8750(19)30038-5. doi:
10.1016/j.wneu.2018.12.168. [Epub ahead of print]

The Modified 5-Item Frailty Index: A Concise and Useful Tool for Assessing the
Impact of Frailty on Postoperative Morbidity Following Elective Posterior Lumbar 
Fusions.

Weaver DJ(1), Malik AT(1), Jain N(1), Yu E(1), Kim J(1), Khan SN(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center,
Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(2)Department of Orthopaedics, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center,
Columbus, Ohio, USA. Electronic address: Safdar.Khan@osumc.edu.

BACKGROUND: The modified 5-item frailty index (mFI-5) is a concise
comorbidity-based risk stratification tool that has been shown to predict the
occurrence of adverse outcomes following various orthopedic surgeries.
METHODS: The 2012-2016 American College of Surgeons - National Surgical Quality
Improvement Program (ACS-NSQIP) dataset was used to identify patients undergoing 
an elective 1- to 2-level posterior lumbar fusion for degenerative lumbar
pathology. The mFI-5 score was calculated based on the presence of the 5
co-morbidities: congestive heart failure within 30 days prior to surgery,
insulin-dependent or noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease or pneumonia, partially dependent or totally dependent
functional health status at time of surgery, and hypertension requiring
medication. Multivariate analysis was used to assess the independent impact of
increasing mFI-5 score on postoperative morbidity while controlling for baseline 
clinical characteristics.
RESULTS: Increasing mFI-5 score versus mFI-5 = 0 was associated with higher odds 
of any complication (mFI-5 ≥2: odds ratio [OR] 1.45; mFI-5 = 1: OR 1.22), 30-day 
readmissions (mFI-5 ≥2: OR 1.46; mFI-5 = 1: OR 1.18), and nonhome discharge
(mFI-5 ≥2: OR 1.80; mFI-5 = 1: OR 1.16). Higher mFI-5 score was significantly
associated with increased risks of superficial surgical site infection, deep
surgical site infection, unplanned reoperation, any medical complication,
pneumonia, unplanned intubation, postoperative ventilator use, progressive renal 
insufficiency, acute renal failure, urinary tract infection, stroke, myocardial
infarction, bleeding requiring transfusion, sepsis, and septic shock.
CONCLUSIONS: Higher mFI-5 scores were associated with increased postoperative
morbidity following elective 1- to 2-level posterior lumbar fusions.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2018.12.168 
PMID: 30639495 


12. Urol Int. 2019 Jan 11:1-9. doi: 10.1159/000494363. [Epub ahead of print]

Evolving Clinical Picture of Renal Cell Carcinoma: A Population-Based Study from 
Helsinki.

Erkkilä K(1), Tornberg SV(2), Järvinen P(1), Järvinen R(1), Kilpeläinen TP(1),
Visapää H(1)(3), Hervonen P(1)(3), Taari K(1), Nisen H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University
Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
(2)Department of Urology, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University
Hospital, Helsinki, Finlandsara.tornberg@hus.fi.
(3)Department of Urology and Comprehensive Cancer Center, Helsinki University and
Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.

BACKGROUND: There is a lack of detailed population-based data for renal cell
carcinoma (RCC).
OBJECTIVES: The study aimed to examine the contemporary changes in the clinical
picture and treatment of RCC.
METHODS: A total of 1,719 consecutive patients living in the Helsinki
metropolitan area with a solid or cystic renal mass (Bosniak 3-4) ≥10 mm were
identified. Data from medical records was evaluated for clinical characteristics 
and treatments in the periods I (2006-2008), II (2009-2011), III (2012-2014), and
IV (2015-2016).
RESULTS: The proportions of patients with comorbidities (Charlson index ≥2) and
frailty (Eastern Co-operative Oncology Group classification ≥2) increased
significantly during the study period. The percentage of clinical stage I
patients, cystic tumors and use of needle biopsies increased significantly. Use
of observation increased from 9% (I) to 32% (IV; p < 0.001). First-line
oncological treatments within 6 months were given to 47% of 262 patients with
metastases and -cytoreductive nephrectomy (CN) was delivered to 54% of those
patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The size of renal tumors continued to decrease, while the percentage
of patients with significant comorbidity or frailty increased. Active
surveillance emerged as the initial strategy. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors with CN 
remained the primary option in patients with metastatic RCC.

© 2019 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000494363 
PMID: 30636255 


13. Am J Nephrol. 2019;49(2):103-110. doi: 10.1159/000496061. Epub 2019 Jan 9.

Comorbidity, Frailty, and Waitlist Mortality among Kidney Transplant Candidates
of All Ages.

Pérez Fernández M(1), Martínez Miguel P(1), Ying H(2), Haugen CE(2), Chu NM(3),
Rodríguez Puyol DM(1), Rodríguez-Mañas L(4), Norman SP(5), Walston JD(6), Segev
DL(2)(3), McAdams-DeMarco MA(7)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Hospital Príncipe de Asturias, Alcalá de Henares,
Madrid, Spain.
(2)Department of Surgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland, USA.
(3)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins School of Public Health, Baltimore, 
Maryland, USA.
(4)Hospital Universitario de Getafe, Madrid, Spain.
(5)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Michigan School of Medicine, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(6)Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(7)Department of Surgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland, USAmara@jhu.edu.
(8)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins School of Public Health, Baltimore, 
Maryland, USAmara@jhu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Kidney transplantation (KT) candidates often present with multiple
comorbidities. These patients also have a substantial burden of frailty, which is
also associated with increased mortality. However, it is unknown if frailty is
merely a surrogate for comorbidity, itself an independent domain of risk, or if
frailty and comorbidity have differential effects. Better understanding the
interplay between these 2 constructs will improve clinical decision making in KT 
candidates.
OBJECTIVE: To test whether comorbidity is equally associated with waitlist
mortality among frail and nonfrail KT candidates and to test whether measuring
both comorbidity burden and frailty improves mortality risk prediction.
METHODS: We studied 2,086 candidates on the KT waitlist (November 2009 - October 
2017) in a multicenter cohort study, in whom frailty and comorbidity were
measured at evaluation. We quantified the association between Charlson
comorbidity index (CCI) adapted for end-stage renal disease and waitlist
mortality using an adjusted Cox proportional hazards model and tested whether
this association differed between frail and nonfrail candidates.
RESULTS: At evaluation, 18.1% of KT candidates were frail and 51% had a high
comorbidity burden (CCI score ≥2). Candidates with a high comorbidity burden were
at 1.38-fold (95% CI 1.01-1.89) increased risk of waitlist mortality. However,
this association differed by frailty status (p for interaction = 0.01): among
nonfrail candidates, a high comorbidity burden was associated with a 1.66-fold
(95% CI 1.17-2.35) increased mortality risk; among frail candidates, here was no 
statistically significant association (HR 0.75, 95% CI 0.44-1.29). Adding this
interaction between comorbidity and frailty to a mortality risk estimation model 
significantly improved prediction, increasing the c-statistic from 0.640 to 0.656
(p < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Nonfrail candidates with a high comorbidity burden at KT evaluation 
have an increased risk of waitlist mortality. Importantly, comorbidity is less of
a concern in already high-risk patients who are frail.

© 2019 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000496061 
PMID: 30625489 


14. Clin Med Insights Cardiol. 2018 Dec 4;12:1179546818809358. doi:
10.1177/1179546818809358. eCollection 2018.

Moving From Heart Failure Guidelines to Clinical Practice: Gaps Contributing to
Readmissions in Patients With Multiple Comorbidities and Older Age.

Iyngkaran P(1), Liew D(2), Neil C(3), Driscoll A(4)(5), Marwick TH(6), Hare
DL(7)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Northern Territory Medical Program, Flinders University, Darwin, NT,
Australia.
(2)School of Public Health and Preventive Medicine, Monash University, Melbourne,
VIC, Australia.
(3)Department of Medicine-Western Precinct, The University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(4)School of Nursing and Midwifery, Deakin University, Geelong, VIC, Australia.
(5)Austin Health, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(6)Baker Heart and Diabetes Institute, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(7)Cardiovascular Research, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC,
Australia.
(8)Heart Failure Services, Austin Health, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.

This feature article for the thematic series on congestive heart failure (CHF)
readmissions aims to outline important gaps in guidelines for patients with
multiple comorbidities and the elderly. Congestive heart failure diagnosis
manifests as a 3-phase journey between the hospital and community, during acute, 
chronic stable, and end-of-life (palliative) phases. This journey requires in
variable intensities a combination of multidisciplinary care within tertiary
hospital or ambulatory care from hospital outpatients or primary health services,
within the general community. Management goals are uniform, ie, to achieve the
lowest New York Heart Association class possible, with improvement in ejection
fraction, by delivering gold standard therapies within a CHF program.
Comorbidities are an important common denominator that influences outcomes.
Comorbidities include diabetes mellitus, chronic obstructive airways disease,
chronic renal impairment, hypertension, obesity, sleep apnea, and advancing age. 
Geriatric care includes the latter as well as syndromes such as frailty, falls,
incontinence, and confusion. Many systems still fail to comprehensively achieve
all aspects of such programs. This review explores these factors.

DOI: 10.1177/1179546818809358 
PMCID: PMC6299336
PMID: 30618487 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interests:The
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.


15. Int Urol Nephrol. 2019 Jan 2. doi: 10.1007/s11255-018-2061-0. [Epub ahead of
print]

Usefulness of frailty evaluation for handling chronic kidney disease elderly
patients: a review and original proposal.

Ostuni M(1), Musso CG(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Physiology Department, Instituto Universitario del Hospital Italiano de Buenos
Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(2)Physiology Department, Instituto Universitario del Hospital Italiano de Buenos
Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina. carlos.musso@hospitalitaliano.org.ar.
(3)Ageing Biology Unit, Hospital Italiano de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires,
Argentina. carlos.musso@hospitalitaliano.org.ar.

There is interdependence between chronic kidney disease (CKD) and ageing whereby 
CKD makes ageing more accelerated and pronounced, whereas ageing accelerates
chronic nephropathy's progression. Frailty status catalyzes this spiral, with
renal and systemic negative consequences, and this condition can currently be
documented by applying already validated clinical scores (frailty phenotype) or
physical test (gate speed). Although, nephroprevention strategies are similar
between young adult and senior CKD patients, standard targets should be adequate 
to very old and frail elderly individuals. For this purpose, an original
algorithm is here proposed to adjust the conventional nephroprevention strategies
to the condition of CKD frail patient (more relaxed targets and tighter control),
as well as to prescribe anti-frailty interventions to slow patient's functional
decline, hospitalization and mortality.

DOI: 10.1007/s11255-018-2061-0 
PMID: 30604227 


16. Am J Cardiol. 2019 Mar 1;123(5):729-735. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2018.11.048. Epub
2018 Dec 4.

Frequency of Renal Dysfunction and Frailty in Patients ≥80 Years of Age With
Acute Coronary Syndromes.

Llaó I(1), Formiga F(1), Ariza Solé A(2), Cruzado JM(1), Sanchís J(3), Rama I(1),
Martínez-Sellés M(4), Garay A(1), Guerrero C(1), Díez-Villanueva P(5), Alegre
O(1), Abu-Assi E(6), Cequier À(1); LONGEVO-SCA registry investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge, L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona,
Spain.
(2)Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge, L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona,
Spain. Electronic address: aariza@bellvitgehospital.cat.
(3)Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valencia, INCLIVA, Universidad de Valencia, 
CIBER-CV, Spain.
(4)Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Spain; CIBERCV,
Universidad Complutense, Universidad Europea, Madrid, Spain.
(5)Hospital Universitario La Princesa, Madrid, Spain.
(6)Hospital Álvaro Cunqueiro, Vigo, Spain.

Although a significant association between renal function and outcomes in
patients with acute coronary syndromes (ACS) has been consistently described,
little information exists about the magnitude of this association in patients at 
older ages. No study assessed the prognostic role of renal function according to 
frailty in patients with ACS. The LONGEVO-SCA registry included unselected ACS
patients aged ≥80 years. Frailty was asessesed by the FRAIL scale, and baseline
creatinine clearance was calculated by the Cockroff-Gault formula. We evaluated
the impact of renal function on mortality or readmission at 6-months according to
frailty status by the Cox regression method. A total of 473 patients were
assessed, with a mean age of 84.2 years. The distribution of patients across
estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) subgroups was as follows: (1) <30
ml/min: n = 76 (16.1%); (2) 30 to 44 ml/min: n = 147 (31.1%); (3) 45 to 60
ml/min: n = 136 (28.8%); and (4) >60 ml/min: n = 114 (24.1%). Patients with lower
eGFR values were older, had a higher proportion of comorbidities and other
geriatric syndromes (p = 0.001) and underwent less often an invasive management
during admission (p < 0.001). The incidence of mortality or readmission at 6
months progressively increased across renal function subgroups (p = 0.001). After
adjusting for potential confounders, this association became nonsignificant
(p = 0.802). The association between eGFR and outcomes was only significant in
patients without frailty (p = 0.001). In conclusion, most patients aged ≥80 years
with NSTEACS had renal function impairment at admission. The association between 
renal function and outcomes was different according to frailty status.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2018.11.048 
PMID: 30593340 


17. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 2018 Dec 21. pii: S1525-8610(18)30641-8. doi:
10.1016/j.jamda.2018.11.009. [Epub ahead of print]

Condition-Specific Pamphlets to Improve End-of-life Communication in Long-term
Care: Staff Perceptions on Usability and Use.

Sussman T(1), Kaasalainen S(2), Lee E(3), Akhtar-Danesh N(2), Strachan PH(2),
Brazil K(4), Bonifas R(5), Bourgeois-Guérin V(6), Durivage P(7), Papaioannou
A(8), Young L(9).

Author information: 
(1)School of Social Work, McGill University, Canada. Electronic address:
tamara.sussman@mcgill.ca.
(2)School of Nursing, McMaster University, Canada.
(3)School of Social Work, McGill University, Canada.
(4)School of Nursing and Midwifery, Queens University Belfast, United Kingdom.
(5)Arizona State University, United States.
(6)Department of Psychology, University of Quebec at Montreal, Canada.
(7)Montreal Central West University Affiliated Health and Social Service Network,
Canada.
(8)Medicine, McMaster University, Canada.
(9)Creative Arts Therapies Department, Concordia University, Canada.

OBJECTIVES: This article reports findings on the usability and staff use of 5
condition- specific pamphlets of high prevalence in long-term care (LTC):
dementia, heart failure, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, renal failure,
and frailty. The pamphlets were created in response to residents', families', and
staff's recommendations for activating early reflections and communication about 
end-of-life care.
DESIGN: A mixed-method (qualitative and quantitative) survey design was used.
Step 1 collected survey data on the usability of the pamphlets. Step 2 collected 
survey data on pamphlet use.
SETTINGS AND PARTICIPANTS: Two nurses with specialized palliative care training, 
2 resident/family representatives, 10 condition-specific specialists, and 33 LTC 
palliative leads reviewed the pamphlets for usability prior to distribution. A
total of 178 LTC home staff in 4 participating LTC homes reported on pamphlet
use.
MEASURES: Specialists and resident/family representatives were asked to provide
open comments and LTC home palliative leads were asked to complete a survey on
the accuracy, readability, and relevance of the pamphlets. After 6 months of
distribution, all staff in participating LTC homes were asked to complete a
survey on pamphlet use, usefulness, and comfort with distribution.
RESULTS: The pamphlets were reportedly accurate, relevant, and easy to
understand. Following 6 months of availability, most staff in LTC had read the
pamphlets, found the information useful, and planned to share them. However, half
of the staff questioned their role in pamphlet distribution and most had not
distributed them. Regulated staff (ie, staff affiliated with a regulated
profession) expressed more comfort sharing the pamphlets than care aides and
support staff.
CONCLUSIONS/IMPLICATIONS: Condition-specific pamphlets appear to hold promise in 
providing residents and families with relevant information that may activate
early reflections and conversations about end-of-life care. However, structured
implementation strategies, training, and discussions are required to improve
staff comfort with distribution and explore roles in distribution and follow-up.

Copyright © 2018 AMDA – The Society for Post-Acute and Long-Term Care Medicine.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jamda.2018.11.009 
PMID: 30583908 


18. Transplant Proc. 2018 Dec;50(10):3968-3972. doi:
10.1016/j.transproceed.2018.07.002. Epub 2018 Jul 7.

Acute Esophageal Necrosis in an Immunosuppressed Kidney Transplant Recipient: A
Case Report.

Mealiea D(1), Greenhouse D(2), Velez M(3), Moses P(3), Marroquin CE(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Department of Cardiac Surgery, Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta, GA.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, University of Vermont Medical Center,
Burlington, VT.
(4)Department of Transplant and Hepatobiliary Surgery and Immunology, University 
of Vermont Medical Center, Burlington, VT. Electronic address:
Carlos.Marroquin@uvmhealth.org.

Acute esophageal necrosis (AEN) is rare and characterized endoscopically by
distal esophageal ulceration, blackening, and necrosis. It typically arises in
patients with multiple comorbidities who have significant systemic disease and
frailty. Specific precipitating events are variable. Evidence suggests a
multifactorial etiology likely involving esophageal ischemia in the setting of
corrosive injury from gastric contents and impaired tissue repair mechanisms. In 
the transplant setting, immunosuppression likely plays a substantial role. We
report a case of AEN in a 70-year-old man following a renal transplant.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.transproceed.2018.07.002 
PMID: 30577298  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Nephron. 2018 Dec 14:1-9. doi: 10.1159/000494223. [Epub ahead of print]

Diagnostic Accuracy of Frailty Screening Methods in Advanced Chronic Kidney
Disease.

Nixon AC(1)(2)(3), Bampouras TM(4)(5), Pendleton N(6), Mitra S(7)(8), Dhaygude
AP(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Renal Medicine, Lancashire Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation
Trust, Preston, United Kingdomandrew.nixon@lthtr.nhs.uk.
(2)Centre for Health Research and Innovation, National Institute of Health
Research Lancashire Clinical Research Facility, Lancashire Teaching Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust, Preston, United Kingdomandrew.nixon@lthtr.nhs.uk.
(3)Division of Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester,
United Kingdomandrew.nixon@lthtr.nhs.uk.
(4)Active Ageing Research Group, University of Cumbria, Lancaster, United
Kingdom.
(5)Faculty of Health and Medicine, Lancaster University, Lancaster, United
Kingdom.
(6)Division of Neuroscience and Experimental Psychology, University of
Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(7)Manchester Academy of Health Sciences Centre, University of Manchester,
Manchester, United Kingdom.
(8)Devices for Dignity, National Institute of Health Research MedTech and
In-vitro Diagnostics Co-operative, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(9)Department of Renal Medicine, Lancashire Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation
Trust, Preston, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Frail patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) have an
increased hospitalisation and mortality rate. However, many popular frailty
screening methods have not been validated in patients with CKD. This study
evaluates the diagnostic accuracy of several frailty screening methods in
patients with CKD G4-5 and those established on haemodialysis (G5D).
METHODS: Ninety participants with CKD G4-5D were recruited from Nephrology
Outpatient Clinics and 2 Haemodialysis Units between December 2016 and December
2017. Frailty was diagnosed using the Fried Frailty Phenotype. The following
frailty screening tests were evaluated: Clinical Frailty Scale, PRISMA-7, CKD
Frailty Index, CKD FI-LAB, walking speed, hand grip strength and Short Physical
Performance Battery.
RESULTS: The mean age of participants was 69 years (SD ±13). One-third of
participants were dialysis-dependent. Nineteen (21%) patients were categorised as
frail, 42 (47%) as pre-frail and 29 (32%) as robust. Overall, walking speed was
the most discriminative measure (AUC 0.97 [95% CI 0.93-1.00], sensitivity 0.84
[95% CI 0.62-0.94], specificity 0.96 [95% CI 0.88-0.99]). The Clinical Frailty
Scale had the best performance of the non-physical assessment frailty screening
methods (AUC 0.90 [95% CI 0.84-0.97], sensitivity 0.79 [95% CI 0.57-0.91],
specificity 0.87 [95% CI 0.78-0.93]).
CONCLUSIONS: Walking speed can be used to accurately screen for frailty in CKD
populations. If it is not practical to perform a physical assessment to screen
for frailty, the Clinical Frailty Scale is a useful alternative.

© 2018 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000494223 
PMID: 30554199 


20. BMC Geriatr. 2018 Dec 11;18(1):305. doi: 10.1186/s12877-018-0997-7.

An overview of co-morbidities and the development of pressure ulcers among older 
adults.

Jaul E(1)(2), Barron J(3)(4), Rosenzweig JP(5), Menczel J(6).

Author information: 
(1)Skilled Geriatric Nursing Department, Herzog Medical Center, 3900, 91035,
Jerusalem, Israel. jaul@zahav.net.il.
(2)Affiliated with the Hebrew University Medical School, Jerusalem, Israel.
jaul@zahav.net.il.
(3)Chronic Ventilation Department, Herzog Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.
(4)Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(5)Clinical Research Center for Brain Sciences, Herzog Medical Center, Jerusalem,
Israel.
(6)Chairman of Geriatric Division Herzog Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.

BACKGROUND: The prevalence of pressure ulcers particularly in the frail older
adult population continues to be high and very costly especially in those
suffering from chronic diseases and has brought a higher awareness to
comprehensive, preventive and therapeutic measures for treatment of pressure
ulcers. Internal risk factors highlighted by comorbidities play a crucial role in
the pathogenesis of pressure ulcers.
MAIN BODY: Focusing on the impact of common chronic diseases (comorbidities) in
aging on pressure ulcers (e.g., cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, chronic
pulmonary diseases, renal diseases and neurodegenerative disorders) and the
significant complicating conditions e.g., anemia, infectious diseases,
malnutrition, hospitalization, incontinence and polypharmacy, frailty and
disability becomes important in developing a more complete, inclusive and
multidisciplinary approach to prevention of PU in older patients.
OBJECTIVE: To describe chronic and acute conditions which are risk factors in
elderly patients for developing PU.
METHODS: We present an overview of comorbidities seen with PU in three diverse
patient locations. The inclusion criteria are sites (community, acute hospital
and long term facilities), older patients, chronic diseases and pressure ulcers
grade 2 and over. Using a recently developed conceptual framework accepted by
European and National Pressure Ulcer Advisory Panels, we examined chronic
diseases to identify the risk factors of chronic conditions and complicating
conditions which potentially influence risk for PU development.
CONCLUSION: Multiple chronic diseases and complicating factors which associated
with immobility, tissue ischemia, and undernutrition are caused to PU in
community settings, hospitals, and nursing facilities.

DOI: 10.1186/s12877-018-0997-7 
PMCID: PMC6290523
PMID: 30537947 


21. Rev Med Chil. 2018 Aug;146(8):864-871. doi: 10.4067/s0034-98872018000800864.

[Changes in social psychological and functional variables among older people
attending a day care center].

[Article in Spanish]

Araya AX(1), Herrera MS(2), Iriarte E(3), Rioja R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Facultad de Enfermería, Universidad Andres Bello, Santiago, Chile.
(2)Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(3)Corporacion renal infantil Mater, Santiago, Chile.
(4)Servicio Nacional del Adulto Mayor, Santiago, Chile.

BACKGROUND: Older people attending day care centers improve their social
activities, perception of quality of life and reduce their institutionalization
rate and risk of mortality in the medium term.
AIM: To evaluate the changes in the integral geriatric assessment and frailty of 
a group of older people attending a day care center in Santiago.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Health self-perception, integral geriatric assessment,
Barthel scale, frailty indicators, mini-mental state scale, Yesavage depression
score and a scale about solitude perception were evaluated in 35 participants
aged 73 ± 6 years on admission and at discharge from a day care center for older 
people.
RESULTS: At discharge, significant improvements were observed for depression,
perception of social support and physical frailty. However, no changes in
functional status, cognitive function and perception of solitude were observed.
CONCLUSIONS: Older people attending improve their perception of social support
and decrease their frailty and depression scores.

DOI: 10.4067/s0034-98872018000800864 
PMID: 30534864 


22. Med Clin (Barc). 2018 Jun;150 Suppl 1:8-24. doi: 10.1016/S0025-7753(18)30666-3.

Use of oral anticoagulants in complex clinical situations with atrial
fibrillation.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Gullón A(1), Sánchez Fuentes D(2), López-de-Sá E(3), Martí-Almor J(4),
Barón-Esquivias G(5), Jiménez López J(4), Del Mar Contreras Muruaga M(1), Suárez 
Fernández C(6).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Medicina Interna, Hospital Universitario de La Princesa, Madrid,
España.
(2)Servicio de Medicina Interna, Complejo Asistencial de Ávila, Ávila, España.
(3)Servicio de Cardiología, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, España.
(4)Sección de Arritmias, Servicio de Cardiología, Hospital del Mar, IMIM, UAB,
Barcelona, España.
(5)Servicio de Cardiología, Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío, Universidad 
de Sevilla, Sevilla, España.
(6)Servicio de Medicina Interna, Hospital Universitario de La Princesa, Madrid,
España. Electronic address: csuarezfe@gmail.com.

The present article provides an update on anticoagulant treatment in patients
with atrial fibrillation in distinct clinical scenarios requiring particular
considerations, such as ischaemic heart disease, electrical cardioversion,
pulmonary vein ablation, the presence of valvular disease with or without
prosthetic valves, and renal insufficiency, as well as old age and frailty. In
patients with non-valvular atrial fibrillation, the presence of renal
insufficiency increases both thrombotic and haemorrhagic risk. In mild and
moderate stages, direct-acting anticoagulants confer a greater benefit than
warfarin, although they usually require dose adjustment. In renal
failure/dialysis, there is no solid evidence that warfarin is beneficial and the 
use of direct-acting anticoagulants is not recommended. Because of its
pathophysiology, oral anticoagulation could have a beneficial effect in patients 
with heart disease. However, vitamin K antagonists have not shown a satisfactory 
risk-benefit ratio. In contrast, direct-acting anticoagulants, at reduced doses, 
could have a beneficial effect in this scenario in association with antiplatelet 
agents. The use of direct-acting anticoagulants prior to electrical cardioversion
in patients with non-valvular atrial fibrillation seems to be associated with a
risk of cardioembolic events that is at least comparable to that of vitamin K
antagonists. Their use avoids delay in the application of electrical
cardioversion in patients without adequate INR levels. In the context of their
use before and after atrial fibrillation ablation, dabiga-tran and rivaroxaban
have demonstrated at least non-inferiority with vitamin K antagonists in terms of
safety. In patients with any type or grade of valvular disease and atrial
fibrillation, the indication of antithrombo-tic treatment must be evaluated in
the same way as in patients with atrial fibrillation and no valvular di-sease.
Whenever anticoagulation is required, direct-acting anticoagulants are the
treatment of choice in nearly all situations, except in patients with mechanical 
valves or who have significant rheumatic mitral disease, who should be treated
with vitamin K antagonists. The choice of appropriate antithrombotic stra-tegy in
frail elderly patients is complex and involves multiple factors beyond assessment
of embolic and haemorrhagic risk. Comprehensive geriatric assessment is essential
for an individualised final decision. Moreover, any such decision should be
consensus-based and periodically reviewed. Direct-acting anticoa-gulants could be
the most beneficial alternative in most elderly patients with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier España, S.L.U. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0025-7753(18)30666-3 
PMID: 30502871 


23. Int Forum Allergy Rhinol. 2019 Feb;9(2):220-224. doi: 10.1002/alr.22239. Epub
2018 Nov 23.

Effect of elderly status on postoperative complications in patients with
sinonasal cancer.

Bashjawish B(1), Patel S(1), Kılıç S(1), Svider PF(1), Hsueh WD(1), Liu
JK(1)(2)(3), Baredes S(1)(2), Eloy JA(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Rutgers New Jersey Medical
School, Newark, NJ.
(2)Center for Skull Base and Pituitary Surgery, Neurological Institute of New
Jersey, Rutgers New Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ.
(3)Department of Neurological Surgery, Rutgers New Jersey Medical School, Newark,
NJ.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Science, Rutgers New Jersey Medical
School, Newark, NJ.

BACKGROUND: Elderly patients with multiple comorbidities may be at higher risk of
postoperative complications. With an increasingly aging population, more data
assessing for predisposing factors are needed in this at-risk group. In this
study, we analyzed the effect of elderly status on relative comorbidities and
complications of sinonasal cancer (SNC) patients receiving surgery.
METHODS: A retrospective database analysis was performed using cases from the
Nationwide Inpatient Sample (NIS) from 2003 to 2012. Patients with a diagnosis of
malignant neoplasm of the nasal cavity or paranasal sinuses, who received surgery
for sinonasal malignancy, including neck dissections, were selected. Demographics
of interest included age, sex, race, type of admission, mean length of stay, and 
median hospital charges. Elderly and nonelderly patients were compared for
differences in rates of acute medical complications, acute surgical
complications, and relevant procedures during hospitalization.
RESULTS: Of the 920 cases identified in the NIS, 382 (41.5%) were elderly (≥65
years). Cases of SNC were more frequently seen in males than females (p < 0.001).
Elderly patients had significantly higher comorbidity rates compared with
nonelderly patients, which included congestive heart failure, hypertension,
diabetes, chronic pulmonary disease, and chronic renal failure (p < 0.001 for
all). Elderly patients more frequently had postoperative cardiac complications
(6.0% vs 0.5%, p < 0.001), but this finding was not statistically significant on 
multivariate analysis when controlling for race, sex, and comorbidities.
CONCLUSION: Elderly status is not an independent factor for postoperative
complications in patients undergoing surgery for sinonasal malignancy.

© 2018 ARS-AAOA, LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/alr.22239 
PMID: 30468000 


24. Clin Interv Aging. 2018 Nov 1;13:2237-2245. doi: 10.2147/CIA.S181400. eCollection
2018.

Impact of frailty on do-not-resuscitate orders and healthcare transitions among
elderly Koreans with pneumonia.

Choi JY(1), Kim SW(1), Yoon SJ(2), Kang MG(1), Kim KI(1), Kim CH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital,
Seongnam 463-707, Republic of Korea, kikim907@snu.ac.kr.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Kangwon National University Hospital
Gangwon-Do 200-722, Republic of Korea.

Purpose: Pneumonia poses a significant health risk in aging societies. We aimed
to elucidate the determinative value of frailty for do-not-resuscitate (DNR)
orders in pneumonia patients.
Patients and methods: This was a retrospective cohort study conducted at the
Seoul National University Bundang Hospital (SNUBH) in Korea. Medical records of
431 pneumonia patients, aged 65 years and older, who were admitted between June
2014 and May 2015 were analyzed. Patients were categorized into DNR and no-DNR
groups.
Results: Among the 65 patients (15.1% of pneumonia patients) who completed DNR
documents, 24 patients were survived, and 21 patients decided imminent to death
(<24 hours before death), with all decisions determined by surrogates. The DNR
group tended to be older and frail, with higher rates of renal impairment and
malnutrition, and had a lower microbiology detection effort than the no-DNR
group. The DNR group used a high number of broad-spectrum antibiotics,
experienced high levels of in-hospital (63.1% vs 5.7%, P<0.001) and 30-day (64.6%
vs 9.6%, P<0.001) mortality rates, and had prolonged hospital stays (median
length of hospital stay, 12 vs 9 days, P=0.020). Frailty was independently
associated with DNR status even after adjustment for sepsis, septic shock, and
the pneumonia severity index (PSI) score. Frailty also significantly influenced
healthcare setting transitions after adjustment for sepsis, septic shock, and the
PSI.
Conclusion: We identified the factors associated with DNR orders and their
prognoses among elderly Koreans with pneumonia. Frailty was significantly
associated with DNR decision and healthcare setting transitions in pneumonia
patients.

DOI: 10.2147/CIA.S181400 
PMCID: PMC6219099
PMID: 30464432  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of
interest in this work.


25. Minerva Endocrinol. 2018 Dec;43(4):501-510. doi: 10.23736/S0391-1977.18.02850-X.

A multistep approach for the stratification of the risk of severe hypoglycemia in
patients with type 2 diabetes.

Nicolucci A(1), Prosperini G(2), Buzzetti R(3), De Cosmo S(4), Fanelli CG(5),
Napoli R(6), Giorgino F(7); AGERE Study Group.

Collaborators: Armenise E, Brandoni G, Bucciarelli L, Coletta J, Di Corato P, Di 
Giovanni G, Elli P, Fontanarosa SA, Gandolfi A, Giovannini C, Grimaldi M, Grossi 
G, Iovino A, Karamouzis I, Lamacchia O, Laviola L, Leto G, Lucibelli L, Maggi D, 
Magro G, Maldera S, Mileti G, Minenna A, Modina P, Modugno M, Parillo M, Piscopo 
M, Romano M, Saccà G, Simonetti R, Sodo G.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Outcomes Research and Clinical Epidemiology, Pescara, Italy -
nicolucci@coresearch.it.
(2)Center for Outcomes Research and Clinical Epidemiology, Pescara, Italy.
(3)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy.
(4)Department of Medical Sciences, Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni
Rotondo, Foggia, Italy.
(5)Department of Medicine, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.
(6)Department of Translational Medical Sciences, Federico II University School of
Medicine, Naples, Italy.
(7)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolic Diseases, Aldo Moro University,
Bari, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Hypoglycemia is the major limiting factor in the glycemic
management of diabetes. Aim of this study was to produce a risk stratification
tool to support the medical decision making, by facilitating the identification
of patients at higher risk of hypoglycemia.
EVIDENCE ACQUISITION: A multistep approach was adopted, including a systematic
review of observational studies investigating risk factors for severe
hypoglycemia in type 2 diabetes (T2DM), followed by an expert input forum to
identify factors perceived as relevant and at the same time reliably detectable, 
to be used for the development of a risk score.
EVIDENCE SYNTHESIS: The systematic review led to the identification of 41
studies. Many factors have been seldom investigated, and their association with
the risk of hypoglycemia is still unclear. Factors more frequently associated
with a high risk of hypoglycemia were: low level of education, ethnicity,
irregular meals/malnutrition, insulin and sulfonylurea therapy, polypharmacy,
previous hypoglycemia, impaired renal function, cognitive impairment, depression 
and frailty. The expert input forum involved 35 diabetologists. Following the
ranking of the relevance of the factors identified, a parsimonious yet
comprehensive set of risk factors was identified.
CONCLUSIONS: The process led to the identification of relevant factors, to be
used for the development of a hypoglycemia risk score. An ad-hoc study will be
performed to assess the contribution of these risk factors and their relative
weight. If the risk score will confirm its ability to correctly stratify patients
according to their risk of hypoglycemia, it will represent a useful support to
optimize the care of people with T2DM.

DOI: 10.23736/S0391-1977.18.02850-X 
PMID: 30463398 


26. Xenotransplantation. 2018 Nov 20:e12471. doi: 10.1111/xen.12471. [Epub ahead of
print]

Chronic dialysis in patients with end-stage renal disease: Relevance to kidney
xenotransplantation.

Jagdale A(1), Cooper DKC(1), Iwase H(1), Gaston RS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Xenotransplantation Program, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama.
(2)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama.

Renal allotransplantation clearly offers better survival and quality of life for 
end-stage renal disease (ESRD) patients than chronic dialysis. The median waiting
time for a deceased donor kidney in a suitable ESRD patient is 3.9 years. The
initial candidates for pig kidney xenotransplantation will be those with ESRD
unlikely to receive an allograft within a reasonable period of time. It is thus
reasonable to ascertain whether clinical trials of xenotransplantation might
likewise offer superior outcomes. Chronic dialysis in patients with ESRD is
associated with poor quality of life, significant morbidity, and relatively high 
mortality, with only 56% surviving 3 years and 42% at 5 years. However, a
significant number of these patients, because of comorbidities, frailty, etc,
would not be considered for renal allotransplantation and likely not for
xenotransplantation. As genetically engineered pig kidneys have satisfactorily
supported life in immunosuppressed nonhuman primates for many months or even more
than a year, consideration in carefully selected patients could be given to pig
kidney xenotransplantation. We suggest that, in order to give a patient the best 
possible outcome, the pig kidney could be transplanted pre-emptively (before
dialysis is initiated). If it fails at any stage, the patient would then begin
chronic dialysis and continue to await an allograft. The present (limited)
evidence is that failure of a pig graft would not be detrimental to a subsequent 
allograft.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/xen.12471 
PMID: 30456901 


27. Injury. 2019 Jan;50(1):149-155. doi: 10.1016/j.injury.2018.11.004. Epub 2018 Nov 
3.

Comparison of individual and composite radiographic markers of frailty in trauma.

Lauerman MH(1), Raithel M(2), Kufera J(3), Shanmuganathan K(4), Bruns BR(5),
Scalea TM(6), Stein DM(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Trauma and Critical Care, R Adams Cowley Shock Trauma Center,
University of Maryland, 22 South Greene St, Baltimore, MD, 21201, USA. Electronic
address: mlauerman@umm.edu.
(2)Division of Trauma and Critical Care, R Adams Cowley Shock Trauma Center,
University of Maryland, 22 South Greene St, Baltimore, MD, 21201, USA. Electronic
address: Maxwell.raithel@som.umaryland.edu.
(3)Division of Trauma and Critical Care, R Adams Cowley Shock Trauma Center,
University of Maryland, 22 South Greene St, Baltimore, MD, 21201, USA. Electronic
address: jkufera@som.umaryland.edu.
(4)Division of Trauma and Critical Care, R Adams Cowley Shock Trauma Center,
University of Maryland, 22 South Greene St, Baltimore, MD, 21201, USA. Electronic
address: kshan@umm.edu.
(5)Division of Trauma and Critical Care, R Adams Cowley Shock Trauma Center,
University of Maryland, 22 South Greene St, Baltimore, MD, 21201, USA. Electronic
address: bbruns@umm.edu.
(6)Division of Trauma and Critical Care, R Adams Cowley Shock Trauma Center,
University of Maryland, 22 South Greene St, Baltimore, MD, 21201, USA. Electronic
address: tscalea@umm.edu.
(7)Division of Trauma and Critical Care, R Adams Cowley Shock Trauma Center,
University of Maryland, 22 South Greene St, Baltimore, MD, 21201, USA. Electronic
address: dstein@umm.edu.

BACKGROUND: Clinical frailty scores usually involve questionnaires or physical
testing. Many trauma patients are not able to participate in these. Radiographic 
measurement of frailty may be a viable alternative. Individual radiographic
markers of frailty have been investigated, such as sarcopenia or osteopenia. The 
ideal radiographic variable (or variables) to measure frailty in trauma is
unknown.
STUDY DESIGN: A retrospective review was performed of restrained drivers ages 40 
and greater at a single institution from 2010-2015. Multiple markers of
radiographic frailty were measured including: sarcopenia, osteopenia, vascular
calcifications, sarcopenic obesity, emphysema, renal volume, cervical spine
degeneration, and cerebral atrophy. Frailty was defined as the worst quartile for
each radiographic variable, and these values were summed to create a composite
marker of frailty. The primary outcome was discharge disposition. We hypothesized
that a composite frailty score would be associated with discharge disposition
while individual markers would not be associated with discharge disposition.
RESULTS: Overall 489 patients were included in this study. Cerebral atrophy
(p = 0.05), renal volume (p = 0.004), sarcopenia (p = 0.05), vascular
calcifications (p = 0.02) and sarcopenic obesity (p = 0.01) were associated with 
discharge disposition. Pearson's correlation coefficients between radiographic
frailty markers were all less than 0.4. Youden's Index was 0.26 (p < 0.001) at a 
composite score of 3. In multivariable analysis, the composite score of 3 or
greater was associated with poor discharge disposition (OR 2.39, 95% CI
1.10-5.18, p = 0.03).
CONCLUSIONS: Individual radiographic frailty markers are inadequate markers of
frailty, as they may miss patients who are frail. This study also suggests that a
composite radiographic frailty score may better predict patient outcome than
individual radiographic markers of frailty.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.injury.2018.11.004 
PMID: 30446256 


28. Sensors (Basel). 2018 Nov 14;18(11). pii: E3939. doi: 10.3390/s18113939.

Hemodialysis Impact on Motor Function beyond Aging and Diabetes-Objectively
Assessing Gait and Balance by Wearable Technology.

Zhou H(1), Al-Ali F(2), Rahemi H(3), Kulkarni N(4), Hamad A(5), Ibrahim R(6),
Talal TK(7), Najafi B(8).

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Consortium on Advanced Motion Performance (iCAMP), Michael
E. DeBakey Department of Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, 
USA. he.zhou2@bcm.edu.
(2)Fahad Bin Jassim Kidney Center, Department of Nephrology, Hamad General
Hospital, PO Box 3050 Doha, Qatar. falali1@hamad.qa.
(3)Interdisciplinary Consortium on Advanced Motion Performance (iCAMP), Michael
E. DeBakey Department of Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, 
USA. hrahemi@gmail.com.
(4)Interdisciplinary Consortium on Advanced Motion Performance (iCAMP), Michael
E. DeBakey Department of Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, 
USA. nishat.kulkarni@bcm.edu.
(5)Fahad Bin Jassim Kidney Center, Department of Nephrology, Hamad General
Hospital, PO Box 3050 Doha, Qatar. ahamad9@hamad.qa.
(6)Fahad Bin Jassim Kidney Center, Department of Nephrology, Hamad General
Hospital, PO Box 3050 Doha, Qatar. ribrahim4@hamad.qa.
(7)Diabetic Foot and Wound Clinic, Hamad Medical Co, PO Box 3050 Doha, Qatar.
ttalal@hamad.qa.
(8)Interdisciplinary Consortium on Advanced Motion Performance (iCAMP), Michael
E. DeBakey Department of Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, 
USA. najafi.bijan@gmail.com.

Motor functions are deteriorated by aging. Some conditions may magnify this
deterioration. This study examined whether hemodialysis (HD) process would
negatively impact gait and balance beyond diabetes condition among mid-age adults
(48⁻64 years) and older adults (65+ years). One hundred and ninety-six subjects
(age = 66.2 ± 9.1 years, body-mass-index = 30.1 ± 6.4 kg/m², female = 56%) in 5
groups were recruited: mid-age adults with diabetes undergoing HD (Mid-age HD+, n
= 38) and without HD (Mid-age HD-, n = 40); older adults with diabetes undergoing
HD (Older HD+, n = 36) and without HD (Older HD-, n = 37); and non-diabetic older
adults (Older DM-, n = 45). Gait parameters (stride velocity, stride length, gait
cycle time, and double support) and balance parameters (ankle, hip, and center of
mass sways) were quantified using validated wearable platforms. Groups with
diabetes had overall poorer gait and balance compared to the non-diabetic group
(p < 0.050). Among people with diabetes, HD+ had significantly worsened gait and 
balance when comparing to HD- (Cohen's effect size d = 0.63⁻2.32, p < 0.050).
Between-group difference was more pronounced among older adults with the largest 
effect size observed for stride length (d = 2.32, p < 0.001). Results suggested
that deterioration in normalized gait speed among HD+ was negatively correlated
with age (r = -0.404, p < 0.001), while this correlation was diminished among
HD-. Interestingly, results also suggested that poor gait among Older HD- is
related to poor ankle stability, while no correlation was observed between poor
ankle stability and poor gait among Older HD+. Using objective assessments,
results confirmed that the presence of diabetes can deteriorate gait and balance,
and this deterioration can be magnified by HD process. Among HD- people with
diabetes, poor ankle stability described poor gait. However, among people with
diabetes undergoing HD, age was a dominate factor describing poor gait
irrespective of static balance. Results also suggested feasibility of using
wearable platforms to quantify motor performance during routine dialysis clinic
visit. These objective assessments may assist in identifying early deterioration 
in motor function, which in turn may promote timely intervention.

DOI: 10.3390/s18113939 
PMCID: PMC6263479
PMID: 30441843  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Transpl Int. 2018 Nov 14. doi: 10.1111/tri.13376. [Epub ahead of print]

Outcome-dependent geographic and individual variations in the access to renal
transplantation in incident dialysed patients: a French nationwide cohort study.

Pladys A(1), Morival C(2), Couchoud C(3), Jacquelinet C(3)(4), Laurain E(5),
Merle S(6), Vigneau C(7)(8), Bayat S(1); REIN registry.

Author information: 
(1)EA 7449 REPERES, EHESP Rennes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Rennes, France.
(2)EHESP High School of Public Health Rennes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Rennes,
France.
(3)Renal Epidemiology and Information Network (REIN), Biomedicine Agency, La
Plaine Saint-Denis, France.
(4)INSERM U1018, Villejuif, France.
(5)Department of Nephrology, CHU Brabois, Nancy, France.
(6)Martinique, Regional Observatory on Health of Martinique, Le Lamentin, France.
(7)INSERM U1085-IRSET, University of Rennes 1, Rennes, France.
(8)Department of Nephrology, CHU Pontchaillou, Rennes, France.

This study investigated geographical variations of access to renal
transplantation using three outcomes (access to the transplant waiting list,
access to renal transplantation after waitlisting and access to renal
transplantation after dialysis start). Associations of patient-related and
regional variables with the studied outcomes were assessed using a Cox shared
frailty model and a Fine and Gray model. At the study endpoint (December 31,
2015), 26.3% of all 18-90-year-old patients who started dialysis in the 22
mainland and four overseas French regions in 2012 (n = 9312) were waitlisted and 
15.1% received a kidney transplant. The geographical disparities of access to
renal transplantation varied according to the studied outcome. Patients from the 
Ile-de-France region had the highest probability of being waitlisted, but were
less likely to receive a kidney transplant. Two regional factors were associated 
with the access to the waiting list and to renal transplantation from dialysis
start: the incidence of preemptive kidney transplantation and of ESRD. The use of
different outcomes to evaluate access to kidney transplantation could help
healthcare policy-makers to select the most appropriate interventions for each
region in order to reduce treatment disparities.

© 2018 Steunstichting ESOT.

DOI: 10.1111/tri.13376 
PMID: 30427074 


30. Am J Cardiol. 2019 Jan 15;123(2):315-322. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2018.10.008.
Epub 2018 Oct 18.

Impact of Dialysis on the Prognosis of Patients Undergoing Transcatheter Aortic
Valve Implantation.

Schymik G(1), Bramlage P(2), Herzberger V(3), Bergmann J(3), Conzelmann LO(4),
Würth A(5), Luik A(3), Schröfel H(6), Tzamalis P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Medical Clinic IV, Municipal Hospital Karlsruhe,
Academic Teaching Hospital of the University of Freiburg, Germany. Electronic
address: gerhard.schymik@klinikum-karlsruhe.de.
(2)Institute for Pharmacology and Preventive Medicine, Cloppenburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Medical Clinic IV, Municipal Hospital Karlsruhe,
Academic Teaching Hospital of the University of Freiburg, Germany.
(4)Helios Clinic for Cardiac Surgery Karlsruhe, Germany.
(5)Department of Cardiology, Medical Clinic III, Vincentius Hospital Karlsruhe,
Germany.
(6)Department Cardiovascular Surgery, University Heart Center Freiburg, Bad
Krozingen, Germany.

End-stage renal disease (ESRD) affects approximately 2% to 4% of patients with
severe aortic stenosis. It is because these patients have been excluded from
clinical trials, the impact of transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI) in 
this patient group has not been thoroughly investigated. Between April 2008 and
March 2015, 2,000 patients (dialysis group, n = 56 [2.8%]) were consecutively
enrolled when diagnosed with severe aortic stenosis and eligible to undergo TAVI.
Procedural and longer-term outcomes were analyzed and adjusted for differences in
baseline characteristics. Patients on dialysis had a higher periprocedural
mortality (10.7% vs 1.7%; adjusted odds ratio [adjOR] 5.65, 95% confidence
interval [CI] 1.91 to 16.67; p = 0.002) and a lower Valve Academic Research
Consortium (VARC)-II (VARC) defined device success (adjOR 0.34, 95% CI 0.15 to
0.79; p = 0.012). At 30 days, there was an increased rate of all-cause mortality 
(21.4 vs 4.8%; adjOR 4.90, 95% CI 1.96 to 12.26; p = 0.001), cardiovascular
(adjOR 3.67, 95% CI 1.43 to 9.41; p = 0.007) and noncardiovascular mortality
(adjOR 6.28, 95% CI 1.36 to 9.41; p = 0.019), myocardial infarction (adjOR 9.39, 
95% CI 1.84 to 48.03; p = 0.007), bleeding (adjOR 2.48, 95% CI 1.06 to 5.83;
p = 0.036) as well as the VARC-II defined early safety combined end point (adjOR 
2.97, 95% CI 1.28 to 6.90; p = 0.012) associated with dialysis. Dialysis was
associated with poor survival at one (57.1% vs 84.2%) and 3 years (26.8% vs
66.9%) with or without the consideration of the first 72 hours (p <0.001;
adjusted p <0.001). Although, in the multivariable regression analysis, reduced
ejection fraction, peripheral arterial disease, pulmonary hypertension (PH),
frailty and dialysis were associated with 1-year mortality, only PH (>60 mm Hg)
remained significant in an analysis restricted to the dialysis patients (adjusted
hazard ratio 2.68; 95% CI 1.18 to 5.88; p = 0.018). PH had a sensitivity of
45.8%, a specificity of 81.3%, and a positive predictive value of 64.7%. In
conclusion, dialysis is an independent predictor of mortality in patients who
underwent TAVI. Long-term mortality in dialysis patients appears to be largely
determined by the kidney disease and/or dialysis itself whereas VARC-II defined
complications are largely unaffected. An increased short-term mortality still
calls for (pre-) procedural optimization.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2018.10.008 
PMID: 30424871 


31. Forensic Sci Med Pathol. 2018 Nov 5. doi: 10.1007/s12024-018-0046-z. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Obturator hernia and the elderly.

Gilbert JD(1), Byard RW(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Forensic Science SA, 21 Divett Place, Adelaide, 5000, Australia.
(2)Forensic Science SA, 21 Divett Place, Adelaide, 5000, Australia.
roger.byard@sa.gov.au.
(3)School of Medicine, Level 3 Medical School North Building, The University of
Adelaide, Frome Road, Adelaide, SA, 5005, Australia. roger.byard@sa.gov.au.

An 84-year-old woman with a history of weight loss, anorexia and episodic
vomiting was admitted to hospital where she died soon afterwards. Her diagnosis
was acute renal injury due to dehydration and malnutrition. At autopsy the body
was cachectic with a small intestinal obstruction due to herniation through a
defect at the anterolateral aspect of the obturator foramen. A poorly
differentiated adenocarcinoma of the gastroesophageal junction was also
identified with small peripheral pulmonary thromboemboli. Death was due to small 
bowel obstruction from a left obturator hernia with scattered peripheral
pulmonary thromboemboli complicating cachexia due to gastroesophageal
adenocarcinoma. Obturator hernias are called the "little old lady's hernia" and
occur mainly in elderly, multiparous and malnourished women. The broader female
pelvis and wider obturator canal with laxity of ligaments and loss of
preperitoneal adipose tissue padding around the canal predispose to herniation.
This rare hernia is often first identified at autopsy.

DOI: 10.1007/s12024-018-0046-z 
PMID: 30397870 


32. Clin Geriatr Med. 2019 Feb;35(1):93-101. doi: 10.1016/j.cger.2018.08.008. Epub
2018 Oct 11.

Vascular Surgery and Geriatric Patients.

Halandras PM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Surgery and Endovascular Surgery, Loyola University
Chicago, Stritch School of Medicine, 2160 South First Avenue, EMS Building 110,
Room 3220, Maywood, IL 60153, USA. Electronic address: phalandras@lumc.edu.

As the population ages, surgical decision-making in vascular surgery has become
more complex. Older patients may not have been offered vascular surgical
intervention in the past because of prohibitive physiologic demands and poor
health. Patients now have more aggressive management of vascular risk factors
with medications, such as statin therapy, and less invasive endovascular or
hybrid treatment options. Outcomes in elderly patients may not be comparable with
younger patients for entities such as aortic aneurysm repair, carotid
endarterectomy, or lower extremity revascularization. Despite this, desirable
outcomes can be successfully achieved and should be offered to carefully selected
elderly individuals.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cger.2018.08.008 
PMID: 30390986 


33. Anesthesiol Clin. 2018 Dec;36(4):599-614. doi: 10.1016/j.anclin.2018.07.008. Epub
2018 Oct 12.

Preoperative Management of the Geriatric Patient: Frailty and Cognitive
Impairment Assessment.

Dalton A(1), Zafirova Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesia and Critical Care, University of Chicago, 5041 South 
Maryland Avenue, MC 4028, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. Electronic address:
adalton@dacc.uchicago.edu.
(2)Section Critical Care, Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Mount Sinai
Hospital System, Icahn School of Medicine, Mount Sinai Medical Center, Box 1028, 
1 Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA.

As the population ages, more geriatric patients will be presenting for surgical
procedures. Preoperative evaluation seeks to assess patients for geriatric
syndromes: frailty, sarcopenia, functional dependence, and malnutrition.
Age-related changes in physiology increase risk for central nervous system,
cardiovascular, pulmonary, renal, hepatic, and endocrine morbidity and mortality.
Identification of various comorbidities allows for preoperative optimization and 
for opportunities for intervention including nutritional supplementation and
prehabilitation, which may improve postoperative outcomes.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anclin.2018.07.008 
PMID: 30390781 


34. Geriatr Gerontol Int. 2018 Dec;18(12):1597-1602. doi: 10.1111/ggi.13534. Epub
2018 Oct 11.

Diabetic nephropathy is associated with frailty in patients with chronic
hemodialysis.

Kakio Y(1), Uchida HA(1)(2), Takeuchi H(1)(3), Okuyama Y(1), Okuyama M(4),
Umebayashi R(1), Wada K(5), Sugiyama H(1)(6), Sugimoto K(7), Rakugi H(7),
Kasahara S(4), Wada J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Rheumatology, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Okayama 
University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Okayama, Japan.
(2)Department of Chronic Kidney Disease and Cardiovascular Disease, Okayama
University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Okayama, Japan.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Innoshima General Hospital, Hiroshima, Japan.
(4)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Okayama University Graduate School of
Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, Japan.
(5)Division of Nephrology and Dialysis, Department of Internal Medicine, Nippon
Kokan Fukuyama Hospital, Hiroshima, Japan.
(6)Department of Human Resource Development of Dialysis Therapy for Kidney
Disease, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, Japan.
(7)Department of Geriatric and General Medicine, Osaka University Graduate School
of Medicine, Osaka, Japan.

AIM: Since 1998, the leading cause of chronic hemodialysis in Japan has been
diabetic nephropathy. Diabetes mellitus is known to be a risk factor for frailty,
but it still remains unknown whether diabetic nephropathy is associated with
frailty in chronic dialysis patients. The authors carried out the present study
to reveal the association between frailty and diabetic nephropathy in chronic
hemodialysis patients.
METHODS: A total of 355 patients who were on hemodialysis were recruited.
Participants were divided into two groups of either patients who suffered
diabetic nephropathy with end-stage renal disease (DN group, n = 150) or not
(Non-DN group, n = 205). The authors investigated the difference of the
prevalence of frailty between the two groups. Furthermore, the authors examined
the risk factors for frailty.
RESULTS: The prevalence of frailty in the DN group was significantly higher than 
that in the Non-DN group (28.0% vs 16.5%, P = 0.0161). To evaluate the
association between frailty and its risk factors, we compared frail patients
(n = 71) and non-frail patients (n = 262). After adjusting their
interrelationships by using multivariate logistic regression analysis, diabetic
nephropathy was determined as a significant risk factor for frailty.
CONCLUSIONS: The authors found the close association between frailty and diabetic
nephropathy in chronic hemodialysis patients. Geriatr Gerontol Int 2018; 18:
1597-1602.

© 2018 Japan Geriatrics Society.

DOI: 10.1111/ggi.13534 
PMID: 30311338 


35. BMC Nephrol. 2018 Oct 11;19(1):260. doi: 10.1186/s12882-018-1030-2.

Design and methodology of the screening for CKD among older patients across
Europe (SCOPE) study: a multicenter cohort observational study.

Corsonello A(1), Tap L(2), Roller-Wirnsberger R(3), Wirnsberger G(4), Zoccali
C(5), Kostka T(6), Guligowska A(6), Mattace-Raso F(2), Gil P(7), Fuentes LG(7),
Meltzer I(8), Yehoshua I(9), Formiga-Perez F(10), Moreno-González R(10), Weingart
C(11), Freiberger E(11), Ärnlöv J(12)(13)(14), Carlsson AC(12)(14), Bustacchini
S(1), Lattanzio F(1); SCOPE investigators.

Collaborators: Lattanzio F, Corsonello A, Bustacchini S, Bolognini S, D'Ascoli P,
Moresi R, Di Stefano G, Cassetta L, Bonfigli AR, Galeazzi R, Lenci F, Bella SD,
Bordoni E, Provinciali M, Giacconi R, Giuli C, Postacchini D, Garasto S, Firmani 
ACR, Nacciariti M, Di Rosa M, Bernabei PFR, Bula C, Haller H, Zoccali C, Jager K,
Van Biesen W, Stevens PE.

Author information: 
(1)Italian National Research Center on Aging (INRCA), Ancona, Fermo and Cosenza, 
Italy.
(2)Section of Geriatric Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus
University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Medical University of Graz, Auenbruggerplatz 
15, 8036, Graz, Austria. Regina.Roller-Wirnsberger@medunigraz.at.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Medical University of Graz, Auenbruggerplatz 
15, 8036, Graz, Austria.
(5)CNR-IFC, Clinical Epidemiology and Pathophysiology of Hypertension and Renal
Diseases, Ospedali Riuniti, Reggio Calabria, Italy.
(6)Department of Geriatrics, Healthy Ageing Research Centre, Medical University
of Lodz, Lodz, Poland.
(7)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Hospital Clinico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain.
(8)The Recanati School for Community Health Professions at the faculty of Health 
Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beersheba, Israel.
(9)Maccabi Healthcare Services Southern Region, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(10)Geriatric Unit, Internal Medicine Department and Nephrology Department,
Bellvitge University Hospital - IDIBELL - L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona,
Spain.
(11)Department of General Internal Medicine and Geriatrics, Krankenhaus
Barmherzige Brüder Regensburg and Institute for Biomedicine of Aging,
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.
(12)Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(13)School of Health and Social Studies, Dalarna University, Falun, Sweden.
(14)Division of Family Medicine, Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and
Society, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Decline of renal function is common in older persons and the
prevalence of chronic kidney disease (CKD) is rising with ageing. CKD affects
different outcomes relevant to older persons, additionally to morbidity and
mortality which makes CKD a relevant health burden in this population. Still,
accurate laboratory measurement of kidney function is under debate, since current
creatinine-based equations have a certain degree of inaccuracy when used in the
older population. The aims of the study are as follows: to assess kidney function
in a cohort of 75+ older persons using existing methodologies for CKD screening; 
to investigate existing and innovative biomarkers of CKD in this cohort, and to
align laboratory and biomarker results with medical and functional data obtained 
from this cohort. The study was registered at ClinicalTrials.gov, identifier
NCT02691546, February 25th 2016.
METHODS/DESIGN: An observational, multinational, multicenter, prospective cohort 
study in community dwelling persons aged 75 years and over, visiting the
outpatient clinics of participating institutions. The study will enroll 2450
participants and is carried out in Austria, Germany, Israel, Italy, the
Netherlands, Poland and Spain. Participants will undergo clinical and laboratory 
evaluations at baseline and after 12 and 24 months- follow-up. Clinical
evaluation also includes a comprehensive geriatric assessment (CGA). Local
laboratory will be used for 'basic' parameters (including serum creatinine and
albumin-to-creatinine ratio), whereas biomarker assessment will be conducted
centrally. An intermediate telephone follow-up will be carried out at 6 and
18 months.
DISCUSSION: Combining the use of CGA and the investigation of novel and existing 
independent biomarkers within the SCOPE study will help to provide evidence in
the development of European guidelines and recommendations in the screening and
management of CKD in older people.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: This study was registered prospectively on the 25th February 
2016 at clinicaltrials.gov ( NCT02691546 ).

DOI: 10.1186/s12882-018-1030-2 
PMCID: PMC6180570
PMID: 30309342 


36. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2018 Oct 11. doi: 10.1093/gerona/gly232. [Epub
ahead of print]

The Burden of Frailty Among U.S. Veterans and Its Association With Mortality,
2002-2012.

Orkaby AR(1)(2)(3), Nussbaum L(2), Ho YL(2), Gagnon D(2)(4), Quach L(2)(5), Ward 
R(2), Quaden R(2), Yaksic E(2), Harrington K(2)(6), Paik JM(1)(7), Kim DH(8)(9), 
Wilson PW(2)(10)(11)(12), Gaziano MJ(2)(3), Djousse L(2)(3), Cho K(2)(3), Driver 
JA(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)New England Geriatric Research, Education, and Clinical Center (GRECC), VA
Boston Healthcare System, Massachusetts.
(2)Massachusetts Veterans Epidemiology Research and Information Center (MAVERIC),
Boston, Massachusetts.
(3)Division of Aging, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts.
(4)Department of Biostatistics, Boston University School of Public Health,
Massachusetts.
(5)Department of Gerontology, University of Massachusetts Boston, Massachusetts.
(6)Department of Psychiatry, Boston University School of Medicine, Massachusetts.
(7)Renal Section, VA Boston Healthcare System, Massachusetts.
(8)Division of Gerontology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center, Boston, Massachusetts.
(9)Division of Pharmacoepidemiology and Pharmacoeconomics, Department of
Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.
(10)Atlanta VA Medical Center, Georgia.
(11)School of Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia.
(12)School of Public Health, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia.

Background: Frailty is a key determinant of clinical outcomes. We sought to
describe frailty among U.S. Veterans and its association with mortality.
Methods: Nationwide retrospective cohort study of regular Veterans Affairs (VA)
users, aged at least 65 years in 2002-2012, followed through 2014, using national
VA administrative and Medicare/Medicaid data. A frailty index (FI) for VA (VA-FI)
was calculated using the cumulative deficit method. Thirty-one age-related
deficits in health from diagnostic and procedure codes were included and were
updated biennially. Survival analysis assessed associations between VA-FI and
mortality.
Results: A VA-FI was calculated for 2,837,152 Veterans over 10 years. In 2002,
36.7% were non-frail (FI = 0-0.10), 33.3% were pre-frail (FI = 0.11-0.20), 18.6% 
were mildly frail (FI = 0.21-0.30), 8.0% were moderately frail (FI = 0.31-0.40), 
and 3.4% were severely frail (FI > 0.40). From 2002 to 2012, the prevalence of
moderate frailty increased to 12.6%and severe frailty to 12.3%. Frailty was
strongly associated with survival and was independent of age, sex, race, and
smoking; the VA-FI better predicted mortality than age alone. Although prevalence
of frailty rose over time, compared to non-frail Veterans, 2 years' hazard ratios
(95% confidence intervals) for mortality declined from a peak in 2004 of 2.05
(2.02-2.09), 3.72 (3.67, 3.78), 6.43 (6.33-6.53), and 11.11 (10.93-11.29) for
pre-frail, mildly, moderately, and severely frail, respectively, to 1.53 (1.51,
1.55), 2.48 (2.44-2.51), 3.96 (3.90-4.01), 6.98 (6.89-7.07) in 2014. At every
frailty level, risk of mortality was lower for women versus men and higher for
blacks versus whites.
Conclusions: Frailty affects 3 of every 10 U.S. Veterans aged at least 65 years, 
and is strongly associated with mortality. The VA-FI could be used to more
accurately estimate life expectancy and individualize care for Veterans.

DOI: 10.1093/gerona/gly232 
PMID: 30307533 


37. J Frailty Aging. 2018;7(4):253-257. doi: 10.14283/10.14283/jfa.2018.22.

Association between High Levels of Parathyroid Hormone and Frailty: The Nepean
Osteoporosis and Frailty (NOF) Study.

Murthy L(1), Dreyer P, Suriyaarachchi P, Gomez F, Curcio CL, Boersma D, Duque G.

Author information: 
(1)Prof. Gustavo Duque, MD, Ph.D., FRACP, Australian Institute for
Musculoskeletal Science (AIMSS), The University of Melbourne and Western health, 
176 Furlong Road, St. Albans, VIC, Australia 3021, Tel: +61 3 8395 8121,Email:
gustavo.duque@unimelb.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Frailty is associated with poor outcomes hence identification of
risks factors is pivotal. Since the independent role of parathyroid hormone (PTH)
in frailty remains unexplored, we aimed to determine this in a population of
older individuals with a history of falling.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional study.
SETTING: Falls and Fracture Clinic, Nepean Hospital (Penrith, Australia).
PARTICIPANTS: 692 subjects (mean age=79, 65% women) assessed between 2009-2015.
MEASUREMENTS: Assessment included clinical examination, mood, nutrition, grip
strength, gait velocity, bone densitometry and posturography. Chemistry included 
serum PTH, calcium, vitamin D (25(OH)D3), creatinine and albumin. Normocalcemic
subjects were divided into 4 groups: (1) Normal: 25(OH)D3 >50nmol/L and PTH
between 1.6-6.8pmol/L; (2) PTH responsive: low 25(OH)D3 (<50nmol/L) and high PTH 
(>6.8pmol/L); (3) PTH unresponsive: low 25(OH)D3 and normal PTH; (4) Hyper PTH
(>6.8pmol/L) with normal 25(OH)D3. Frailty was defined using Fried's criteria.
Difference between the groups was assessed using one-way ANOVA and X2 analysis.
Multinomial logistic regression evaluated the association between the groups and 
the number of Fried's criteria adjusted for age, BMI, renal function, 25(OH)D3
levels, and albumin.
RESULTS: 22.6% subjects had high PTH levels (>6.8pmol/L). All subjects in the
high PTH groups had significantly lower grip strength, gait velocity, limits of
stability, and higher BMI. The PTH responsive group had a higher risk of
pre-frailty (β=3.8, 95% CI = 3.42 - 5.22, p≷ 0.01) and frailty (β=8.26, 95% CI = 
2.8-16.1, p<0.01). The risk of frailty was also higher in the Hyper PTH group
(β=2.3, 95% CI = 1.74-4.32, p<0.01).
CONCLUSION: We have reported an independent association of high PTH levels with
high number of falls and with the clinical components of physical frailty in
community dwelling older persons. Our results suggest a possible role of PTH in
frailty that deserves further exploration.

DOI: 10.14283/10.14283/jfa.2018.22 
PMID: 30298174 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest


38. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2018 Oct 1;33(suppl_3):iii35-iii40. doi:
10.1093/ndt/gfy175.

Chronic inflammation in end-stage renal disease and dialysis.

Cobo G(1), Lindholm B(2), Stenvinkel P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Education and Research, Hospital Eugenio Espejo, Quito, Ecuador.
(2)Division of Renal Medicine and Baxter Novum, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden.

Under normal conditions, inflammation is a protective and physiological response 
to various harmful stimuli. However, in several chronic debilitating disorders,
such as chronic kidney disease, inflammation becomes maladaptive, uncontrolled
and persistent. Systemic persistent inflammation has, for almost 20 years, been
recognized as a major contributor to the uraemic phenotype (such as
cardiovascular disease, protein energy wasting, depression, osteoporosis and
frailty), and a predictor of cardiovascular and total mortality. Since
inflammation is mechanistically related to several ageing processes
(inflammageing), it may be a major driver of a progeric phenotype in the uraemic 
milieu. Inflammation is likely the consequence of a multifactorial aetiology and 
interacts with a number of factors that emerge when uraemic toxins accumulate.
Beside interventions aiming to decrease the production of inflammatory molecules 
in the uraemic milieu, novel strategies to increase the removal of large middle
molecules, such as expanded haemodialysis, may be an opportunity to decrease the 
inflammatory allostatic load associated with retention of middle molecular weight
uraemic toxins.

DOI: 10.1093/ndt/gfy175 
PMCID: PMC6168801
PMID: 30281126 


39. Aging Dis. 2018 Oct 1;9(5):769-784. doi: 10.14336/AD.2017.1214. eCollection 2018 
Oct.

Hyperphosphatemia Promotes Senescence of Myoblasts by Impairing Autophagy Through
Ilk Overexpression, A Possible Mechanism Involved in Sarcopenia.

Sosa P(1), Alcalde-Estevez E(1)(2), Plaza P(1), Troyano N(1), Alonso C(3),
Martínez-Arias L(4), Evelem de Melo Aroeira A(1), Rodriguez-Puyol D(2)(5)(6),
Olmos G(1)(6), López-Ongil S(2)(6), Ruíz-Torres MP(1)(6).

Author information: 
(1)1System Biology Department, Alcala University, Alcalá de Henares, Madrid,
Spain.
(2)2Research Unit, Biomedical Research Foundation from Príncipe de Asturias
University Hospital, Alcalá de Henares, Madrid, Spain.
(3)3Geriatric and Frailty Section, Getafe University Hospital, Getafe, Madrid,
Spain.
(4)4Bone and Mineral Research Unit, Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias.
Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria del Principado de Asturias, Red de
Investigación Renal (REDinREN] del ISCIII, Oviedo, Spain.
(5)5Nephrology Section, Biomedical Research Foundation from Principe de Asturias 
University Hospital, Alcalá de Henares, Madrid, Spain.
(6)6Instituto Reina Sofía de Investigación Nefrológica, IRSIN, Madrid, Spain.

In mammalians, advancing age is associated with sarcopenia, the progressive and
involuntary loss of muscle mass and strength. Hyperphosphatemia is an
aging-related condition involved in several pathologies. The aim of this work was
to assess whether hyperphosphatemia plays a role in the age-related loss of mass 
muscle and strength by inducing cellular senescence in murine myoblasts and to
explore the intracellular mechanism involved in this effect. Cultured mouse C2C12
cells were treated with 10 mM beta-glycerophosphate (BGP] at different periods of
time to induce hyperphosphatemia. BGP promoted cellular senescence after 24 h of 
treatment, assessed by the increased expression of p53, acetylated-p53 and p21
and senescence associated β-galactosidase activity. In parallel, BGP increased
ILK expression and activity, followed by mTOR activation and autophagy reduction.
Knocking-down ILK expression increased autophagy and protected cells from
senescence induced by hyperphosphatemia. BGP also reduced the proliferative
capacity of cultured myoblasts. Old mice (24-months-old] presented higher serum
phosphate concentration, lower forelimb strength, higher expression of p53 and
ILK and less autophagy in vastus muscle than young mice (5-months-old]. In
conclusion, we propose that hyperphosphatemia induces senescence in cultured
myoblasts through ILK overexpression, reducing their proliferative capacity,
which could be a mechanism involved in the development of sarcopenia, since old
mice showed loss of muscular strength correlated with high serum phosphate
concentration and increased levels of ILK and p53.

DOI: 10.14336/AD.2017.1214 
PMCID: PMC6147593
PMID: 30271655 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that
there is no conflict of interest.


40. Semin Dial. 2018 Nov;31(6):607-611. doi: 10.1111/sdi.12744. Epub 2018 Sep 21.

Conventional dialysis in the elderly: How lenient should our guidelines be?

Corbett RW(1), Brown EA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Imperial College Renal and Transplant Centre, Hammersmith Hospital, Imperial
College Healthcare NHS, London, UK.

There has been a dramatic, worldwide expansion in life expectancy across the last
century. This has resulted in a progressively more elderly and comorbid
population. It is increasingly recognized that healthcare in this group needs to 
move to the concept of "adding life to years". Recognition and assessment of
frailty is vital in changing our approach in elderly patients. Current guidelines
in dialysis have a limited evidence base across all age groups, but particularly 
the elderly and serve them poorly. Moreover, the burden of guidelines for each
comorbidity of the multimorbid patient is increasing and can be conflicting.
Finally, there is increasing evidence relating to the harm associated with the
delivery of conventional dialysis. In dialysis patients, frailty is the
overwhelming determinant in relation to patient-specific outcomes rather than
modality of treatment; therefore, the focus should be on promoting quality of
life. We need to focus on new priorities of care when we design guidelines "for
people not diseases". Patient-centered goal-directed therapy, arising from shared
decision making between physician and patient, should allow adaption of the
dialysis regime to maximize opportunities while minimizing treatment-related
morbidity and concentrating on alleviating symptoms.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/sdi.12744 
PMID: 30239040 


41. Clin Transplant. 2018 Nov;32(11):e13410. doi: 10.1111/ctr.13410. Epub 2018 Oct
28.

Association between the "Timed Up and Go Test" at transplant evaluation and
outcomes after kidney transplantation.

Michelson AT(1)(2), Tsapepas DS(2)(3), Husain SA(1)(2), Brennan C(1)(2)(4),
Chiles MC(1)(2)(4), Runge B(3), Lione J(1), Kil BH(1), Cohen DJ(1), Ratner LE(3),
Mohan S(1)(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology, Columbia University Medical
Center, New York, New York.
(2)The Columbia University Renal Epidemiology (CURE) Group, New York, New York.
(3)Department of Surgery, Division of Transplantation, Columbia University
Medical Center, New York, New York.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, Columbia University Mailman School of Public
Health, New York, New York.

BACKGROUND: Studies have demonstrated the Timed Up and Go Test's (TUGT) ability
to forecast postoperative outcomes for several surgical specialties. Evaluations 
of the TUGT for waitlist and posttransplant outcomes have yet to be examined in
kidney transplantation.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the prognostic utility of the TUGT and its associations with
waitlist and posttransplant outcomes for kidney transplant candidates.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Single-center, prospective study of 518 patients who
performed TUGT during their transplant evaluation between 9/1/2013-11/30/2014.
TUGT times were evaluated as a continuous variable or 3-level discrete
categorical variable with TUGT times categorized as long (>9 seconds), average
(8-9 seconds), or short (5-8 seconds).
RESULTS: Transplanted individuals had shorter TUGT times than those who remained 
on the waitlist (8.99 vs 9.79 seconds, P < 0.001). Bivariable and multivariable
logistic regression showed that after adjusting for age, there was no association
between TUGT times and probability of waitlist removal (OR 0.997 [0.814-1.221]), 
prolonged length of stay posttransplant (OR 1.113 [0.958-1.306] for deceased
donor, OR 0.983 [0.757-1.277] for living donor), and 30-day readmissions (OR
0.984 [0.845-1.146] for deceased donor, OR 1.254 [0.976-1.613] for living donor).
CONCLUSIONS: The TUGT was not associated with waitlist removal or prolonged
hospitalization for kidney transplant candidates. Alternative assessments of
global health, such as functional status or frailty, should be considered for
evaluation of potential kidney transplant candidates.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ctr.13410 
PMCID: PMC6265056 [Available on 2019-11-01]
PMID: 30230036 


42. Am J Nephrol. 2018;48(4):235-241. doi: 10.1159/000492338. Epub 2018 Sep 18.

Early Hospital Readmission in Older and Younger Kidney Transplant Recipients.

Haugen CE(1), King EA(1), Bae S(1), Bowring MG(1), Holscher CM(1), Garonzik-Wang 
J(1), McAdams-DeMarco M(1)(2), Segev DL(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland, USA.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins School of Public Health, Baltimore, 
Maryland, USA.

BACKGROUND: Up to 31% of kidney transplant (KT) recipients experience early
hospital readmission (EHR). We hypothesized that EHR among older KT recipients is
higher than younger recipients due to increased comorbidities and higher
prevalence of frailty.
METHODS: We identified 22,458 older (age ≥65) and 86,372 younger (18 to < 65)
first-time KT recipients (December 1, 1999 - December 31, 2014) using United
States Renal Data System data. We estimated the association between patient-level
characteristics and EHR (30 days post-KT discharge) with modified Poisson
regression among older and younger KT recipients, separately. We estimated the
association between graft loss and mortality and EHR using Cox proportional
hazards.
RESULTS: EHR was more common in older KT recipients (30.1 vs. 27.6%; p < 0.001). 
Risk factors for EHR that differed by recipient age included female sex, African 
American race, diabetes, smoking, dialysis vintage, donor age, and length of
stay. Risk of graft loss associated with EHR was greater among older KT
recipients (adjusted hazard ratio [aHR] 1.64, 95% CI 1.51-1.77, p < 0.001) than
younger KT recipients (aHR 1.43, 95% CI 1.38-1.48, p < 0.001; interaction p <
0.01). However, the risk of mortality associated with EHR was greater among
younger recipients (aHR 1.52, 95% CI 1.47-1.57, p < 0.001) than that in older
-recipients (aHR 1.40, 95% CI 1.34-1.47, p < 0.001; interaction p < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Older KT recipients are more likely to experience EHR and are at a
higher risk of graft loss after EHR than younger recipients. Targeted
interventions to prevent EHR and subsequent graft loss in this population should 
be identified.

© 2018 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000492338 
PMCID: PMC6212310 [Available on 2019-09-18]
PMID: 30227406 


43. BMC Nephrol. 2018 Sep 12;19(1):230. doi: 10.1186/s12882-018-1032-0.

Physical activity promotion for patients transitioning to dialysis using the
"Exercise is Medicine" framework: a multi-center randomized pragmatic trial
(EIM-CKD trial) protocol.

Jagannathan R(1), Ziolkowski SL(2), Weber MB(1), Cobb J(3), Pham N(4), Long J(2),
Anand S(2), Lobelo F(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Hubert Department of Global Health, Rollins School of Public Health, Emory
University, 1518 Clifton Road NE, CNR 7051, Atlanta, GA, 30322, USA.
(2)Division of Nephrology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, CA,
USA.
(3)Renal Division, Department of Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine,
Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(4)Division of Nephrology, Santa Clara Valley Medical Center, San Jose, CA, USA.
(5)Hubert Department of Global Health, Rollins School of Public Health, Emory
University, 1518 Clifton Road NE, CNR 7051, Atlanta, GA, 30322, USA.
felipelobelo@emory.edu.
(6)Exercise is Medicine Global Research and Collaboration Center, 1518 Clifton
Road NE, CNR 7051, Atlanta, GA, 30322, USA. felipelobelo@emory.edu.

BACKGROUND: Patients on dialysis are physically inactive, with most reporting
activity levels below the fifth percentile of healthy age-matched groups. Several
small studies have reported efficacy of diverse exercise interventions among
persons with CKD and those on dialysis. However, no single intervention has been 
widely adopted in real-world practice, despite a clear need in this vulnerable
population with high rates of mortality, frailty, and skilled nursing
hospitalizations.
METHODS/DESIGN: We describe a pragmatic clinical trial for an exercise
intervention among patients transitioning to dialysis. We will use an existing
framework - Exercise is Medicine (EIM) - developed by the American College of
Sports Medicine. After undertaking formative qualitative research to tailor the
EIM framework to the advanced CKD population (eGFR < 30 ml/min/1.73m2), we will
randomize 96 patients from two regions-Atlanta and Bay Area-in two intervention
arms with incremental levels of clinical-community integration: physical activity
assessment during Nephrology clinical visit, brief counseling at pre-dialysis
education, and physical activity wearable (group 1) versus group 1 intervention
components plus a referral to a free, EIM practitioner-led group exercise program
over 16 weeks (group 2; 8 week core intervention; 8-week follow up). We will
assess efficacy by comparing between group differences in minutes/week of
objectively measured moderate intensity physical activity. To evaluate
implementation, we will use questionnaires for assessing barriers to referral,
participation and retention along the path of the intervention. Further we will
have a plan for dissemination of the intervention by partnering with relevant
stakeholders.
DISCUSSION: The overall goal is to inform the development of a practical,
cost-conscious intervention "package" that addresses barriers and challenges to
physical activity commonly faced by patients with advanced CKD and can be
disseminated amongst interested practices.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov identifier (Dated:10/17/2017): NCT03311763
.

DOI: 10.1186/s12882-018-1032-0 
PMCID: PMC6136167
PMID: 30208854 


44. Med J Aust. 2018 Sep 17;209(6):275-279.

When to initiate dialysis for end-stage kidney disease: evidence and challenges.

Chen T(1), Lee VW(2), Harris DC(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW titi.chen@sydney.edu.au.
(2)University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW.

The decision about when to start dialysis for end-stage kidney disease (ESKD) is 
complex and is influenced by many factors. ESKD-related symptoms and signs are
the most common indications for dialysis initiation. Creatinine-based formulae to
estimate glomerular filtration rate (GFR) are inaccurate in patients with ESKD
and, thus, the decision to start dialysis should not be based solely on estimated
GFR (eGFR). Early dialysis initiation (ie, at an eGFR > 10 mL/min/1.73
m<sup>2</sup>) is not associated with a morbidity and mortality benefit, as shown
in the Initiating Dialysis Early and Late (IDEAL) study. This observation has
been incorporated into the latest guidelines, which place greater emphasis on the
assessment of patients' symptoms and signs rather than eGFR. It is suggested that
in asymptomatic patients with stage 5 chronic kidney disease, dialysis may be
safely delayed until the eGFR is at least as low as 5-7 mL/min/1.73 m<sup>2</sup>
if there is careful clinical follow-up and adequate patient education. The
decision on when to start dialysis is even more challenging in older patients.
Due to their comorbidities and frailty, dialysis initiation may be associated
with worse outcomes and quality of life. Therefore, the decision to start
dialysis in these patients should be carefully weighed against its risks, and
conservative care should be considered in appropriate cases. To optimise the
decision-making process for dialysis initiation, patients need to be referred to 
a nephrologist in a timely fashion to allow adequate pre-dialysis care and
planning. Dialysis initiation and its timing should be a shared decision between 
physician, patients and family members, and should be tailored to the individual 
patient's needs.


PMID: 30208820 


45. Respiration. 2018 Sep 11:1-11. doi: 10.1159/000492286. [Epub ahead of print]

Three-Year Hospitalization and Mortality in Elderly Smokers with Chronic
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease or Chronic Heart Failure.

Beghé B(1), Fabbri LM(2)(3), Garofalo M(1), Schito M(2), Verduri A(1), Bortolotti
M(1), Stendardo M(2), Ruggieri V(1), Fucili A(4), Sverzellati N(5), Della Casa
G(6), Maietti E(7), Clini EM(1), Boschetto P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, Section of Respiratory Diseases, 
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.
(2)University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(3)Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Goteborg, Sweden.
(4)Department of Cardiology, and LTTA Center, University Hospital of Ferrara,
Cona, Italy.
(5)Division of Radiology, Department of Clinical Sciences, University of Parma,
Parma, Italy.
(6)Radiology Unit, University Hospital of Modena, Modena, Italy.
(7)Center for Clinical and Epidemiological Research, University Hospital of
Ferrara, Cona, Italy.

BACKGROUND: In elderly smokers, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and 
chronic heart failure (CHF) usually present with dyspnoea. COPD and CHF are
associated -almost invariably with concomitant chronic diseases, which contribute
to severity and prognosis.
OBJECTIVES: We investigated similarities and differences in the clinical
presentation, concomitant chronic diseases and risk factors for -mortality and
hospitalization at 3-year follow-up in elderly smokers/ex-smokers with a primary 
diagnosis of COPD or CHF recruited and followed in specialized centers.
METHODS: We examined 144 patients with COPD and 96 with CHF, ≥65 years, ≥20
pack/years, and measured COPD Assessment Test (CAT) score, modified Medical
Research Council, NYHA, and Charlson Index, routine blood test, estimated
glomerular filtration rate, HRCT scan, 6-min walk test. In addition, in each
patient we actively searched for CHF, COPD, peripheral vascular disease, and
metabolic syndrome.
RESULTS: COPD and CHF patients had mild to moderate disease, but the majority was
symptomatic. Comorbidities were highly prevalent and often unrecognized in both
groups. COPD and CHF patients had a similar risk of hospitalization and death at 
3 years. Lower glomerular filtration rate, shorter 6MWT, and ascending aorta
calcification score ≥2 were independent predictors of mortality in COPD, whereas 
previous 12 months hospitalizations, renal disease, and heart diameter were in
CHF patients. Lower glomerular filtration rate value, higher CAT score, and lower
FEV1/FVC ratio were associated with hospitalization in COPD, while age, lower
FEV1% predicted, and peripheral vascular disease were in CHF.
CONCLUSIONS: There are relevant similarities and differences between patients
with COPD and CHF even when admitted to specialized outpatient centers,
suggesting that these patients should be manage in multidisciplinary units.

© 2018 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000492286 
PMID: 30205380 


46. Drugs Aging. 2018 Oct;35(10):897-905. doi: 10.1007/s40266-018-0587-6.

Frailty Status Affects the Decision for Long-Term Anticoagulation Therapy in
Elderly Patients with Atrial Fibrillation.

Papakonstantinou PE(1), Asimakopoulou NI(2), Papadakis JA(2), Leventis D(2),
Panousieris M(2), Mentzantonakis G(2), Hoda E(2), Panagiotakis S(2), Gikas A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital of Heraklion "PAGNI",
School of Medicine, University of Crete, Voutes, 71110, Heraklion, Crete, Greece.
pantelispapakon@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital of Heraklion "PAGNI",
School of Medicine, University of Crete, Voutes, 71110, Heraklion, Crete, Greece.

BACKGROUND: Elderly patients are underrepresented in the studies concerning
anticoagulation therapy (AT) in atrial fibrillation (AF), while patients' frailty
status is lacking in most of the studies.
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to evaluate AT in AF elderly patients and study the 
effect of patients' frailty status on their long-term AT.
METHODS: We conducted an observational prospective study that enrolled
consecutive AF patients (≥ 75 years) who were hospitalized in the Department of
Internal Medicine of the University Hospital of Heraklion, Crete, Greece from 1
June 2015 to 1 June 2016. We recorded the AT on admission and at discharge,
all-cause mortality, and hospital readmission in a follow-up period of 1 year
after hospital discharge. Frailty status was assessed by pre-established scores.
RESULTS: One hundred and four consecutive patients (49% male; median age
87 years) were enrolled, 78 (78.8%) of whom received AT at discharge. Patients
who did not receive AT at discharge had a higher HEMORR2HAGES (Hepatic or renal
disease, Ethanol abuse, Malignancy, Older age, Reduced platelet count or
function, Re-bleeding, Hypertension, Anemia, Genetic factors, Excessive fall risk
and Stroke) score (5.5 ± 1.15 vs. 4.79 ± 1.68; p = 0.032), a lower Katz score
(2.48 ± 2.23 vs. 4.08 ± 2.25; p = 0.006), and a higher Clinical Frailty Scale
score (7 ± 1.95 vs. 5.57 ± 2.05; p = 0.006). Sixty-five patients (62.5%) were
readmitted to a hospital during the follow-up period. In-hospital death occurred 
in five patients (4.8%) and 57 patients (57.6%) died within the follow-up period.
CONCLUSION: A high percentage of the elderly AF patients did not receive AT, even
at discharge. Patients who did not receive AT at discharge had higher bleeding
and frailty scores. In the 1-year follow-up period after hospital discharge, high
all-cause mortality and a high number of hospital readmissions were recorded.

DOI: 10.1007/s40266-018-0587-6 
PMID: 30203312  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2018 Oct;130:27-35. doi:
10.1016/j.critrevonc.2018.07.003. Epub 2018 Jul 18.

Early mortality in myeloma patients treated with first-generation novel agents
thalidomide, lenalidomide, bortezomib at diagnosis: A pooled analysis.

Bringhen S(1), Offidani M(2), Palmieri S(3), Pisani F(4), Rizzi R(5), Spada S(1),
Evangelista A(6), Di Renzo N(7), Musto P(8), Marcatti M(9), Vallone R(10), Storti
S(11), Bernardini A(1), Centurioni R(12), Aitini E(13), Palmas A(14), Annibali
O(15), Angelucci E(16), Ferrando P(17), Baraldi A(18), Rocco S(19), Andriani
A(20), Siniscalchi A(21), De Stefano V(22), Meneghini V(23), Palumbo A(1),
Grammatico S(24), Boccadoro M(1), Larocca A(25).

Author information: 
(1)Myeloma Unit, Division of Hematology, University of Torino, Azienda
Ospedaliero-Universitaria Città della Salute e della Scienza di Torino, Torino,
Italy.
(2)Clinica di Ematologia, AOU Ospedali Riuniti di Ancona, Ancona, Italy.
(3)Divisione di Ematologia con Unità TMO, AO Cardarelli, Napoli, Italy.
(4)Hematology and Stem Cell Transplant Unit, Regina Elena National Cancer
Institute, Rome, Italy.
(5)Section of Hematology with Transplantation, Department of Emergency and Organ 
Transplantation, University of Bari Medical School, Bari, Italy.
(6)Unit of Clinical Epidemiology, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Città della
Salute e della Scienza di Torino and CPO Piemonte, Torino, Italy.
(7)U.O. Ematologia, P.O. V. Fazzi, Lecce, Italy.
(8)Scientific Direction, IRCCS-CROB, Referral Cancer Center of Basilicata,
Rionero in Vulture (PZ), Italy.
(9)U.O. Ematologia e Trapianto di Midollo, IRCCS Ospedale San Raffaele, Milano,
Italy.
(10)Azienda Ospedaliera Gaetano Rummo, Immunoematologia e Trasfusione, Benevento,
Italy.
(11)UOC Oncoematologia Fondazione di Ricerca e Cura Giovanni Paolo II, Campobasso
- Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Campobasso, Italy.
(12)U.O.C. Medicina Interna Civitanova Marche, Italy.
(13)Struttura Complessa di Oncologia Medica ed Ematologia, Azienda Ospedaliera
Carlo Poma, Mantova, Italy.
(14)Divisione Ematologia, Ospedale San Francesco, Nuoro, Italy.
(15)UOC Ematologia e Trapianto di Cellule Staminali, Università Campus
Bio-Medico, Roma, Italy.
(16)IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria San Martino - IST Istituto Nazionale 
per la Ricerca sul Cancro, Genova, Italy.
(17)S.C. Oncologia, Ospedale A. Manzoni, Lecco, Italy.
(18)SOC Ematologia ospedale SS Antonio e Biagio e C. Arrigo Alessandria, Italy.
(19)Divisione di Ematologia, AO Cardarelli, Napoli, Italy.
(20)UOSD di Ematologia, ASL Roma1, Roma, Italy.
(21)UOC Ematologia Ospedale S. Eugenio Roma, Italy.
(22)Istituto di Ematologia, Università Cattolica, Fondazione Policlinico
Universitario A. Gemelli, Roma, Italy.
(23)Hematology Unit, Department of Medicine, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria
Integrata, Verona, Italy.
(24)Hematology, "Sapienza" University of Rome, Italy.
(25)Myeloma Unit, Division of Hematology, University of Torino, Azienda
Ospedaliero-Universitaria Città della Salute e della Scienza di Torino, Torino,
Italy. Electronic address: alessandra.larocca@unito.it.

INTRODUCTION: Early toxic death (≤60 days of diagnosis) in elderly multiple
myeloma (MM) patients is attributable to active disease, age and co-morbidities. 
Rate of early toxic deaths is 10% with conventional chemotherapy mainly due to
infection and renal failure. Novel agents have improved MM outcome at the expense
of newer toxicity.
METHODS: We analyzed 1146 individual patient data to assess toxic deaths during
induction treatment with first-generation novel agents thalidomide, lenalidomide,
bortezomib.
RESULTS: During first-line therapy, 119/1146 patients (10%) died for any cause,
and 47/1146 (4%) due to toxicity, including 12/1146 (1%) early deaths. The
24-month cumulative incidence was 4.1% without any difference between bortezomib 
(18/503 patients, 4%) and lenalidomide (29/643patients, 5%; p = 0.31). Toxic
deaths occurred in 34/1039 (3%) patients <80 years and 13/107 (12%) patients ≥80 
years. Causes were cardiac events (28%), infections (26%) and vascular
complications (15%). In a multivariate analysis, older age and unfavorable ISS
stage increased the risk of death.
CONCLUSION: First-generation novel agents significantly reduced toxic deaths
compared to conventional chemotherapy. One third of deaths during first-line
therapy were due to cumulative drug-related toxicities, thus supportive
approaches and prevention strategies should be optimized. The higher mortality
rate for toxicity in octogenarians confirms the need for a careful frailty
assessment.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2018.07.003 
PMID: 30196909  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Blood Purif. 2018;46(4):332-336. doi: 10.1159/000492149. Epub 2018 Sep 3.

Acute Kidney Injury and Chronic Kidney Disease in the Elderly and Polypharmacy.

Formica M(1), Politano P(2), Marazzi F(1), Tamagnone M(1), Serra I(1), Marengo
M(1), Falconi D(1), Gherzi M(1), Tattoli F(1), Bottaro C(1), Giuliano D(3),
Tibaldi V(2), Isaia GC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Nephrology and Dialysis ASLCN1 Hospitals Cuneo, Cuneo, Italy.
(2)Gerontology and Geriatric Chair, University of Turin, Turin, Italy.
(3)Clinical Laboratory ASLCN1 Savigliano, Savigliano, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Acute kidney injury (AKI) incidence is reported to be 10 times higher
in aged people. Related to their higher prevalence of chronic kidney disease
(CKD), older patients are at high risk of toxic effects driven by drugs.
METHODS: The demographics, hospitalizations, visits to the Emergency Department, 
pharmacological therapy, and lab tests were analyzed in 71,588 individuals.
RESULTS: Data showed a higher prevalence of AKI as well as CKD in the elderly as 
compared to the younger group, with an associated very high mortality. A broad
number of drugs was prescribed, ranging from 1 to 35, the majority being between 
5 and 9 drugs.
CONCLUSION: Elderly patients who developed AKI had a higher number of
hospitalizations (underlying frailty), were more likely to progress to more
severe stages of CKD and to be affected by other non-renal pathologies
(associated comorbidities) and to be given heavier pharmacological prescriptions 
(polypharmacy).

© 2018 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000492149 
PMID: 30176676 


49. Eur J Clin Invest. 2018 Nov;48(11):e13020. doi: 10.1111/eci.13020. Epub 2018 Sep 
16.

Bioactive food and exercise in chronic kidney disease: Targeting the
mitochondria.

Mafra D(1)(2), Gidlund EK(3), Borges NA(2), Magliano DC(2), Lindholm B(4),
Stenvinkel P(4), von Walden F(5).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Medical Sciences, Fluminense Federal University (UFF),
Niterói, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(2)Graduate Program in Cardiovascular Sciences, Fluminense Federal University
(UFF), Niterói, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(3)Division of Molecular Exercise Physiology, Department of Physiology and
Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Division of Renal Medicine, Department of Clinical Science Intervention and
Technology, Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Women's and Children's health, 
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

Chronic kidney disease (CKD), which affects 10%-15% of the population, associates
with a range of complications-such as cardiovascular disease, frailty,
infections, muscle and bone disorders and premature ageing-that could be related 
to alterations of mitochondrial number, distribution, structure and function. As 
mitochondrial biogenesis, bioenergetics and the dynamic mitochondrial networks
directly or indirectly regulate numerous intra- and extracellular functions, the 
mitochondria have emerged as an important target for interventions aiming at
preventing or improving the treatment of complications in CKD. In this review, we
discuss the possible role of bioactive food compounds and exercise in the
modulation of the disturbed mitochondrial function in a uraemic milieu.

© 2018 Stichting European Society for Clinical Investigation Journal Foundation.

DOI: 10.1111/eci.13020 
PMID: 30144313 


50. Trials. 2018 Aug 24;19(1):457. doi: 10.1186/s13063-018-2842-x.

Frailty Intervention Trial iN End-Stage patientS on haemodialysis (FITNESS):
study protocol for a randomised controlled trial.

Anderson BM(1)(2), Dutton M(1), Day E(3), Jackson TA(4)(2), Ferro CJ(1), Sharif
A(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation
Trust, Birmingham, UK.
(2)Institute of Inflammation and Ageing, University of Birmingham, Birmingham,
UK.
(3)National Addiction Centre, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and
Neuroscience, King's College London, London, UK.
(4)Department of Geriatrics, University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation
Trust, Birmingham, UK.
(5)Department of Nephrology, University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation
Trust, Birmingham, UK. Adnan.sharif@uhb.nhs.uk.
(6)Institute of Immunology and Immunotherapy, University of Birmingham,
Birmingham, UK. Adnan.sharif@uhb.nhs.uk.

BACKGROUND: Frailty is a state of low physiological reserve and multi-systemic
dysregulation that leads to susceptibility to external stressors; it is
associated with adverse outcomes. North American data suggest that haemodialysis 
recipients are more likely to be frail than the general population, although data
on UK cohorts are lacking. Furthermore, with a multitude of assessment tools, it 
is difficult for the clinician to ascertain which is most suitable for this
population. The FITNESS Study aims to measure the prevalence and outcomes
associated with frailty in a large UK haemodialysis cohort to determine the
optimum frailty tool as defined by predictive value for mortality/hospitalisation
and to conduct a feasibility study exploring a multi-disciplinary clinical
intervention to improve frailty among haemodialysis recipients.
METHODS/DESIGN: The study will follow a cohort multiple randomised controlled
trial design; the initial cohort study will identify participants to be invited
into a subsequent open-label randomised controlled trial. Eligible patients will 
be identified and recruited from their usual haemodialysis session. They will be 
invited to complete tasks and questionnaires collecting data on sarcopenia,
immunosenescence, mood, cognition, disability, and comorbidity. Fifty pre-frail
participants with suitable English proficiency will be randomly selected from
this cohort to participate in the randomised controlled trial phase of the study.
Further stratified randomisation will occur to assign these 50 participants to
active or passive groups. The active group will receive a psychologically
supported, patient-centred, multi-disciplinary intervention into frailty, in what
we believe to be a first within this patient group. The control group will
receive usual haemodialysis standard of care. All participants will be followed
up using electronic patient records for outcomes to include hospitalisation and
mortality. Primary outcomes for this phase of the study will be feasibility and
tolerability of the clinical intervention study.
DISCUSSION: The study will collect data on multiple aspects of frailty allowing
for a rich dataset for detailed analysis. We believe this will be the first study
to explore a psychologically supported, patient-centred intervention in this
patient group.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Clinicaltrials.gov, NCT03071107 . Registered on 6 March 2017.

DOI: 10.1186/s13063-018-2842-x 
PMCID: PMC6109321
PMID: 30143028  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Can J Diabetes. 2018 Jun 20. pii: S1499-2671(18)30001-7. doi:
10.1016/j.jcjd.2018.06.001. [Epub ahead of print]

Frailty, Health-Related Quality of Life, Cognition, Depression, Vitamin D and
Health-Care Utilization in an Ambulatory Adult Population with Type 1 or Type 2
Diabetes Mellitus and Chronic Kidney Disease: A Cross-Sectional Analysis.

Adame Perez SI(1), Senior PA(2), Field CJ(1), Jindal K(3), Mager DR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(3)Northern Alberta Renal Program, Alberta Health Services and Department of
Nephrology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(4)Department of Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. Electronic address: mager@ualberta.ca.

OBJECTIVES: Frailty can cause increased vulnerability to adverse health outcomes,
such as falls, fractures, depression and reduced health-related quality of life
(HRQoL). This cross-sectional study compared the differences in body composition,
HRQoL, mental health and cognitive and vitamin D (vitD) status with health-care
utilization by frail and nonfrail adults with diabetes mellitus (type 1 and type 
2) and with chronic kidney disease (stages 1 through 5).
METHODS: We studied adults with type 1 and type 2 diabetes and chronic kidney
disease stages 1 through 5 who were participating in a longitudinal follow-up
study (41 to 83 years of age; n=41). Body composition (dual-energy x-ray
absorptiometry); vitD status (serum 25[OH]D3); frailty (Edmonton Frail Scale);
depression (Major Depression Inventory); HRQoL (Short Form Health Survey-36); and
cognitive status (Mini Mental State exam) were measured using validated tools.
Participants who were on dialysis and had body weights >136 kg, and coinciding
comorbidities known to influence vitD metabolism were excluded.
RESULTS: Frailty occurred in 17% of participants (n=7). Frail participants had
lower lean body mass, lower HRQoL scores (individual and composite scores), more 
depression (p=<0.05) and higher numbers of health visits (total, inpatient and
emergency) compared with nonfrail participants (p<0.05). No differences in
health-care visit types or vitD status were noted between frail and nonfrail
participants (p>0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Frailty in an ambulatory population of adults with chronic kidney
disease and diabetes is associated with low lean body mass, low HRQoL, greater
depression and higher numbers of health-care visits.

Copyright © 2018 Diabetes Canada. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcjd.2018.06.001 
PMID: 30139571 


52. Thromb Res. 2018 Oct;170:75-83. doi: 10.1016/j.thromres.2018.08.008. Epub 2018
Aug 15.

The prothrombin time does not predict the risk of recurrent venous
thromboembolism or major bleeding in rivaroxaban-treated patients.

Ten Cate H(1), Lensing AWA(2), Weitz JI(3), Middeldorp S(4), Beyer-Westendorf
J(5), Kubitza D(6), Brighton T(7), Raskob GE(8), Mismetti P(9), Prandoni P(10),
Gebel M(11), Prins MH(12).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Internal Medicine and Biochemistry, Cardiovascular Research
Institute Maastricht (CARIM) and Thrombosis Expertise Center, Maastricht
University Medical Center (MUMC+), Maastricht, the Netherlands. Electronic
address: h.tencate@maastrichtuniversity.nl.
(2)Bayer AG, Wuppertal, Germany. Electronic address: anthonie.lensing@bayer.com.
(3)Thrombosis & Atherosclerosis Research Institute and McMaster University,
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada. Electronic address: weitzj@taari.ca.
(4)Department of Vascular Medicine, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands. Electronic address: s.middeldorp@amc.uva.nl.
(5)Thrombosis Research Unit, Department of Medicine I, Division Hematology,
University Hospital "Carl Gustav Carus", Dresden, Germany; Kings Thrombosis
Service, Department of Hematology, Kings College London, UK. Electronic address: 
Jan.Beyer@uniklinikum-dresden.de.
(6)Bayer Pharma AG, Wuppertal, Germany. Electronic address:
dagmar.kubitza@bayer.com.
(7)Department of Haematology, NSW Health pathology, Prince of Wales Hospital,
Sydney, Australia. Electronic address: timothy.brighton@health.nsw.gov.au.
(8)University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, College of Public Health,
Oklahoma City, OK, USA. Electronic address: gary-raskob@ouhsc.edu.
(9)Service de Médecine Vasculaire et Thérapeutique, Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire de Saint-Etienne, Saint-Etienne, France. Electronic address:
mismetti@univ-st-etienne.fr.
(10)Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, Vascular Medicine Unit, University of 
Padua, Padua, Italy.
(11)Bayer Healthcare, Wuppertal, Germany. Electronic address:
martin.gebel@bayer.com.
(12)Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, the Netherlands. Electronic
address: mh.prins@maastrichtuniversity.nl.

INTRODUCTION: For treatment of deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism 
(PE), rivaroxaban is given in fixed doses without routine coagulation monitoring.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: To determine whether monitoring would enhance its
benefit-risk profile, we examined whether peak and trough prothrombin time (PT)
values measured in 3797 rivaroxaban-treated patients included in the EINSTEIN DVT
and PE studies correlated with subsequent recurrent VTE and major bleeding. In
addition, we examined the stability of PT values over time and the impact of
clinical variables on PT values.
RESULTS: The mean peak PT values at months 3 and 6 or 12 were 21.9 ± 5 and
21.7 ± 6.0 s, respectively, while the mean trough PT values at months 2 and 6
were 15.1 ± 5.1 and 15.3 ± 2.9 s, respectively. Although peak and through PT
values were higher in females, and with older age, frailty, active cancer, low
body weight, impaired renal function and use of moderate to strong inhibitors of 
CYP3A4 and/or P-glycoprotein, and were lower in patients taking strong CYP 3A4
inducers, the differences were small and results were overlapping. Neither peak
nor trough PT values correlated with recurrent VTE or major bleeding.
CONCLUSIONS: PT monitoring is unlikely to improve the benefit-risk profile of
rivaroxaban in patients with DVT or PE. The study was registered at
www.clinicaltrials.gov as #NCT00440193 (EINSTEIN-DVT) and #NCT00439777
(EINSTEIN-PE).

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.thromres.2018.08.008 
PMID: 30121419  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


53. JACC Heart Fail. 2018 Sep;6(9):771-779. doi: 10.1016/j.jchf.2018.03.016. Epub
2018 Aug 8.

A Bayesian Model to Predict Survival After Left Ventricular Assist Device
Implantation.

Kanwar MK(1), Lohmueller LC(2), Kormos RL(3), Teuteberg JJ(4), Rogers JG(5),
Lindenfeld J(6), Bailey SH(7), McIlvennan CK(8), Benza R(7), Murali S(7), Antaki 
J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Institute, Allegheny Health Network, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. 
Electronic address: Manreet.kanwar@ahn.org.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania.
(3)Heart and Vascular Institute, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(4)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Stanford University Medical Center,
Stanford, California.
(5)Division of Cardiology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North
Carolina.
(6)Cardiovascular Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee.
(7)Cardiovascular Institute, Allegheny Health Network, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(8)Cardiovascular Institute, University of Colorado, Aurora, Colorado.

OBJECTIVES: This study investigates the use of a Bayesian statistical models to
predict survival at various time points in patients undergoing left ventricular
assist device (LVAD) implantation.
BACKGROUND: LVADs are being increasingly used in patients with end-stage heart
failure. Appropriate patient selection continues to be key in optimizing
post-LVAD outcomes.
METHODS: Data used for this study were derived from 10,277 adult patients from
the INTERMACS (Inter-Agency Registry for Mechanically Assisted Circulatory
Support) who had a primary LVAD implanted between January 2012 and December 2015.
Risk for mortality was calculated retrospectively for various time points (1, 3, 
and 12 months) after LVAD implantation, using multiple pre-implantation
variables. For each of these endpoints, a separate tree-augmented naïve Bayes
model was constructed using the most predictive variables.
RESULTS: A set of 29, 26, and 31 pre-LVAD variables were found to be predictive
at 1, 3, and 12 months, respectively. Predictors of 1-month mortality included
low Inter-Agency Registry for Mechanically Assisted Circulatory Support profile, 
number of acute events in the 48 h before surgery, temporary mechanical
circulatory support, and renal and hepatic dysfunction. Variables predicting
12-month mortality included advanced age, frailty, device strategy, and chronic
renal disease. The accuracy of all Bayesian models was between 76% and 87%, with 
an area under the receiver operative characteristics curve of between 0.70 and
0.71.
CONCLUSIONS: A Bayesian prognostic model for predicting survival based on the
comprehensive INTERMACS registry provided highly accurate predictions of
mortality based on pre-operative variables. These models may facilitate clinical 
decision-making while screening candidates for LVAD therapy.

Copyright © 2018 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jchf.2018.03.016 
PMCID: PMC6119115 [Available on 2019-09-01]
PMID: 30098967 


54. J Gastrointest Surg. 2018 Dec;22(12):2029-2036. doi: 10.1007/s11605-018-3853-3.
Epub 2018 Jul 31.

The Association of Body Mass Index with Postoperative Outcomes After Elective
Paraesophageal Hernia Repair.

Landa ST(1), Cohen JB(2)(3), Swendiman RA(1), Wirtalla C(1), Dempsey DT(1), Dumon
KR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Perelman School
of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 3400 Spruce St, Philadelphia, PA, 19104,
USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Renal-Electrolyte and Hypertension Division, Perelman 
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA.
(3)Center for Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Perelman School of
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA.
(4)Department of Surgery, Division of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Perelman School
of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 3400 Spruce St, Philadelphia, PA, 19104,
USA. kristoffel.dumon@uphs.upenn.edu.

PURPOSE: To evaluate the association between body mass index (BMI) and
postoperative outcomes in elective paraesophageal hernia (PEH) repairs.
METHODS: A retrospective review of patients who underwent elective PEH repair in 
the ACS NSQIP database (2005-2015) was performed. Patients were stratified into
BMI groups (< 18.5, 18.5-24.9, 25.0-29.9, 30.0-34.9, 35-39.9, and ≥ 40.0 kg/m2)
according to the World Health Organization classification criteria. A
multivariable logistic regression model was developed to characterize the
association between BMI class and outcomes, including readmission, reoperation,
postoperative complications, and mortality.
RESULTS: The median (IQR) age of the 9641 patients who met inclusion criteria was
64 (55-72) and 72.7% were women. Across each BMI class, age, race, gender, type
of procedure, frailty index, smoking, and ASA class varied (p < 0.05).
Underweight patients (BMI < 18.5 kg/m2) had an increased risk of mortality
(OR = 6.35, p < 0.05). Patients with a BMI 35-39.9 kg/m2 (OR = 0.65, p < 0.05)
and ≥ 40 kg/m2 (OR = 0.36, p < 0.001) were associated with a decreased risk for
readmissions.
CONCLUSION: Underweight patients have an increased risk for postoperative
mortality after elective PEH repair. Higher BMI was associated with a diminished 
risk for readmission, but not for mortality, reoperations, or overall
complications.

DOI: 10.1007/s11605-018-3853-3 
PMID: 30066068 


55. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2018;1065:529-544. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-77932-4_32.

Sex Differences in Heart Failure.

Savarese G(1), D'Amario D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden. gianluigi.savarese@ki.se.
(2)Polo di Scienze Cardiovascolari e Toraciche, Università Cattolica del Sacro
Cuore, Fondazione Policlinico A. Gemelli, Rome, Italy.

Heart failure (HF) represents a global pandemic health problem with a high impact
on health-care costs, affecting about 26 million adults worldwide. The overall HF
prevalence and incidence are ~2% and ~0.2% per year, respectively, in Western
countries, with half of the HF population with reduced ejection fraction (HFpEF) 
and half with preserved (HFpEF) or mid-range ejection fraction (HFmrEF). Sex
differences may exist in HF. More males have HFrEF or HFmrEF and an ischemic
etiology, whereas more females have HFpEF and hypertension, diastolic
dysfunction, and valvular pathologies as HF etiologies. Females are generally
older, have a higher EF, higher frequency of HF-related symptoms, and lower NYHA 
functional status. Generally, it is observed that female HF patients tend to have
more comorbidities such as atrial fibrillation, diabetes, hypertension, anemia,
iron deficiency, renal disease, arthritis, frailty, depression, and thyroid
abnormalities. However, overall, females have better prognosis in terms of
mortality and hospitalization risk compared with men, regardless of EF. Potential
sex differences in HF characteristics may be underestimated because of the
underrepresentation of females in cardiovascular research and, in particular, the
sex imbalance in clinical trial enrollment may avoid to identify sex-specific
differences in treatments' benefit.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-77932-4_32 
PMID: 30051405 


56. Circ Cardiovasc Interv. 2018 Jul;11(7):e006778. doi:
10.1161/CIRCINTERVENTIONS.118.006778.

Impact of Frailty on Clinical Outcomes in Patients With Critical Limb Ischemia.

Takeji Y(1), Yamaji K(2), Tomoi Y(1), Okazaki J(3), Tanaka K(3), Nagae A(1),
Jinnouchi H(1), Hiramori S(1), Soga Y(1), Ando K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology (Y. Takeji, K.Y., Y. Tomoi, A.N., H.J., S.H., Y.S.,
K.A.).
(2)Department of Cardiology (Y. Takeji, K.Y., Y. Tomoi, A.N., H.J., S.H., Y.S.,
K.A.) kyohei@yamaji.info.
(3)Department of Vascular Surgery (J.O., K.T.), Kokura Memorial Hospital,
Kitakyushu, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The predictive ability of patient frailty on clinical outcomes after 
revascularization in patients with critical limb ischemia remains largely
unknown.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We enrolled 643 patients with critical limb ischemia treated
with endovascular therapy (N=486) or bypass surgery (N=157) in January 2010 to
January 2016, and prospectively assessed them using a 9-level clinical frailty
scale (CFS). Patients were divided into 3 groups according to CFS levels: low
(CFS level, 1-3; N=234), intermediate (CFS level, 4-6; N=196), and high (CFS
level, 7-9; N=213) groups. Clinical follow-up rate was 95.8% at 2 years. In the
low, intermediate, and high CFS groups, 2-year overall survival rates were 80.5%,
63.1%, and 49.3% (P<0.001) and amputation-free survival rates were 77.9%, 60.5%, 
and 46.2% (P<0.001), respectively. In multivariable analysis, higher frailty was 
independently associated with all-cause death (intermediate CFS group: adjusted
hazard ratio, 1.64; 95% confidence interval, 1.12-2.42; P=0.01; high CFS group:
adjusted hazard ratio, 2.22; 95% confidence interval, 1.52-3.23; P<0.001) and a
composite of all-cause death and major amputation (intermediate CFS group:
adjusted hazard ratio, 1.72; 95% confidence interval, 1.19-2.48; P=0.004; high
CFS group: adjusted hazard ratio, 2.34; 95% confidence interval, 1.64-3.35;
P<0.001). Frailty was also independently associated with overall survival and
amputation-free survival in patients aged ≤75 and >75 years, those who underwent 
endovascular therapy or bypass surgery, and those with or without chronic renal
failure, without significant interactions.
CONCLUSIONS: Frailty was independently associated with 2-year overall survival
and amputation-free survival in patients with critical limb ischemia treated with
revascularization, irrespective of age, revascularization mode, and chronic renal
failure status.

© 2018 American Heart Association, Inc.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCINTERVENTIONS.118.006778 
PMID: 30006333 


57. J Hand Surg Am. 2018 Aug;43(8):701-709. doi: 10.1016/j.jhsa.2018.05.029. Epub
2018 Jul 3.

Use of a 5-Item Modified Frailty Index for Risk Stratification in Patients
Undergoing Surgical Management of Distal Radius Fractures.

Wilson JM(1), Holzgrefe RE(1), Staley CA(1), Schenker ML(1), Meals CG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Emory University Orthopedics and Spine, Atlanta, GA.
(2)Emory University Orthopedics and Spine, Atlanta, GA. Electronic address:
clifton.meals@emory.edu.

PURPOSE: Compared with cast treatment, surgery may expose patients with distal
radius fractures to undue risk. Surgical intervention in this cohort may offer
less benefit than previously thought and appropriate patient selection is
imperative. The modified Frailty Index (mFI) predicts complications after other
orthopedic surgeries. We hypothesized that this index would predict, and might
ultimately prevent, complications in patients older than 50 years with distal
radius fractures.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed the American College of Surgeons-National
Surgery Quality Improvement Program (ACS-NSQIP) database, including patients
older than 50 years who underwent open reduction and internal fixation of a
distal radius fracture. A 5-item mFI score was then calculated for each patient. 
Postoperative complications, readmission and reoperation rates, as well as length
of stay (LOS) were recorded. Bivariate and multivariable statistical analysis was
then performed.
RESULTS: We identified 6,494 patients (mean age, 65 years). Compared with
patients with mFI of 0, patients with mFI of 2 or greater were nearly 2.5 times
as likely to incur a postoperative complication (1.7% vs 7.4%). Specifically, the
rates of Clavien-Dindo IV, wound, cardiac, and renal complications were increased
significantly in patients with mFI of 2 or greater. In addition, as mFI increased
from 0 to 2 or greater, 30-day reoperation rate increased from 0.8% to 2.4%,
30-day readmission from 0.8% to 4.6%, and LOS from 0.5 days to 1.44 days. Frailty
was associated with increased complications as well as rates of readmission and
reoperation even when controlling for demographic data, LOS, and operative time. 
Age alone was not significantly associated with postoperative complications,
readmission, reoperation, or LOS.
CONCLUSIONS: A state of frailty is highly predictive of postoperative
complications, readmission, reoperation, and increased LOS following open
reduction and internal fixation of distal radius fractures. Our data suggest that
a simple frailty evaluation can help inform surgical decision making in patients 
older than 50 years with distal radius fractures.
TYPE OF STUDY/LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Prognostic II.

Copyright © 2018 American Society for Surgery of the Hand. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhsa.2018.05.029 
PMID: 29980394 


58. Clin Invest Med. 2018 Jun 30;41(2):E43-E50. doi: 10.25011/cim.v41i2.29914.

Short and Long Term Mortality Predictors in Octogenarians with Acute Coronary
Syndromes.

Atas H(1), Tigen K, Ozben B, Kartal F, Gurel E, Atas DB, Sari İ, Basaran Y.

Author information: 
(1)Marmara University School of Medicine Department of Cardiology, Istanbul,
Turkey. email@email.com.

PURPOSE: Octogenarians with acute coronary syndromes have higher mortality and
morbidity due to higher prevalence of comorbidities and frailty. The aim of this 
study was to explore the predictors of short and long term mortality in
octogenarians with ACS.
METHODS: Ninety-eight consecutive octogenarians presenting with acute coronary
syndrome (mean age:84±3 years, 56 male) were included. All patients underwent
coronary angiography and were given optimal medical treatment. The primary end
point was cardiovascular mortality in hospital and at one year.
RESULTS: Fifteen patients died during hospitalization and 20 patients died after 
discharge within the first year. ST-segment-elevation myocardial infarction and
hypotension were significantly more prevalent in the in-hospital mortality group 
while atrial fibrillation and hyponatremia were more prevalent in the long-term
mortality group. All deceased patients had significantly lower left ventricular
ejection fraction and glomerular filtration rate. Cox analysis revealed
ST-segment-elevation myocardial infarction, hypotension and left ventricular
ejection fraction as independent predictors of in-hospital mortality while
hyponatremia, atrial fibrillation and renal dysfunction as independent predictors
of long term mortality.
CONCLUSION: It would be reasonable to pay further attention to octogenarians with
acute coronary syndrome if they are presenting with ST-segment-elevation
myocardial infarction, and have hypotension, impaired left ventricular function, 
hyponatremia, atrial fibrillation or renal dysfunction, which are associated with
increased mortality.

DOI: 10.25011/cim.v41i2.29914 
PMID: 29959882 


59. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2018 Aug;37(8):1013-1020. doi:
10.1016/j.healun.2018.04.006. Epub 2018 Apr 25.

Bloodstream infections in mechanical circulatory support device recipients in the
International Society of Heart and Lung Transplantation Mechanically Assisted
Circulation Support Registry: Epidemiology, risk factors, and mortality.

Aslam S(1), Xie R(2), Cowger J(3), Kirklin JK(4), Chu VH(5), Schueler S(6), de By
T(7), Gould K(8), Morrissey O(9), Lund LH(10), Martin S(11), Goldstein D(12),
Hannan M(13).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, California. Electronic address: saslam@ucsd.edu.
(2)James and John Kirklin Institute for Research in Surgical Outcomes (KIRSO),
Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Department of Surgery, The University of
Alabama at Birmingham, Alabama.
(3)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Henry Ford Hospitals, Detroit, Michigan.
(4)Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery. Director, Kirklin Institute for Research
in Surgical Outcomes (KIRSO), Department of Surgery, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Alabama.
(5)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina.
(6)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Newcastle Hospitals NHS Foundation
Trust, Newcastle, United Kingdom.
(7)QUIP Project Manager, EUROMACS Managing Director, EUROMACS, Berlin, Germany.
(8)Department of Microbiology, Newcastle Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust,
Newcastle, United Kingdom.
(9)Department of Infectious Diseases, Alfred Health, Melbourne, Australia.
(10)Unit of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden.
(11)Division of Infectious Diseases. Geisinger Health System, Danville,
Pennsylvania.
(12)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Montefiore Medical Center, New York,
New York.
(13)Division of Infectious Diseases, Mater Miscordiae University Hospital,
Dublin, Ireland.

BACKGROUND: We used multicenter international data from the International Society
of Heart and Lung Transplantation Mechanically Assisted Circulation Support
(IMACS) registry to determine bloodstream infection (BSI) event rate, independent
risk factors, and association with mortality.
METHODS: Included were patients registered in IMACS from January 2013 through
December 2015, assessed BSI event rate of mechanical circulatory support (MCS)
and non-MCS-related BSIs, and conducted univariate and multivariate analyses
between BSI with baseline characteristics and mortality.
RESULTS: We documented 1,606 BSIs in 1,231 of 10,171 MCS recipients (12%), with
an event rate of 2.43 BSIs/100 patient-months within 3 months after implant
(early onset) and 1.03 BSIs/100 patient-months after 3 months (late onset). Of
these episodes, 1,378 (85.8%) were non- MCS-related BSI. Increasing body mass
index and bilirubin were independent correlates of MCS-related BSI. Independent
correlates of non-MCS-related BSI included older age, higher body mass index,
previous cardiac surgery, baseline chronic renal disease and dialysis,
pre-implant frailty, presence of biventricular assist device, total artificial
heart or right ventricular assist device, and Interagency Registry for
Mechanically Assisted Circulatory Support category 1. Survival after 3 months
after implant of patients who developed early-onset BSI was 56.9% at 24 months vs
77.4% in patients without early-onset BSI (p < 0.001). Early-onset BSI was an
independent correlate of mortality at 3 months after implantation (hazard ratio, 
2.56; 95% confidence interval, 2.09-3.15; p < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Early-onset BSI was associated with significantly increased 24-month
mortality. More than 85% of these BSIs were not device related. There is an
opportunity for infection prevention practices to decrease the BSI event rate,
which may affect 24-month survival. These data can also serve as benchmarking for
individual institutions.

Copyright © 2018 International Society for the Heart and Lung Transplantation.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.healun.2018.04.006 
PMID: 29936085 


60. J Nutr Gerontol Geriatr. 2018 Apr-Jun;37(2):117-129. doi:
10.1080/21551197.2018.1478696. Epub 2018 Jun 20.

Markers of Renal Function in Older Adults Completing a Higher Protein Obesity
Intervention and One Year Later: Findings from the MEASUR-UP Trial.

Porter Starr KN(1)(2)(3), McDonald SR(1)(2), Jarman A(1), Orenduff M(1), Sloane
R(1)(4), Pieper CF(1)(4), Bales CW(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)a Center for the Study of Aging , Duke University School of Medicine , Durham 
, NC , USA.
(2)b Department of Medicine , Duke University School of Medicine , Durham , NC , 
USA.
(3)c Geriatric Research, Education, and Clinical Center , Durham VA Medical
Center , Durham , NC , USA.
(4)d Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics , Duke University School of
Medicine , Durham , NC , USA.

Increases in rates of obesity in the older population are hastening the
development of chronic illnesses, including chronic kidney disease (CKD).
However, obesity reduction in older adults is besought with concerns about the
long-term benefit/risk, especially regarding loss of muscle mass and its impact
on function. Higher protein intakes have been advocated to help offset the
tendency for loss of muscle during weight reduction but this raises concerns
about possible negative effects on older kidneys. We assessed markers of renal
function in venous blood samples collected during a six-month randomized
controlled weight loss trial of higher protein intake in obese (n = 67;
BMI ≥ 30 kg/m2) older (≥60 years) adults with physical frailty and age-normal
renal status (glomerular filtration rate [GFR] ≥ 45); the Control diet (0.8 g
protein/kg body weight/day; n = 21) was compared to a protein-enhanced (1.2 g/g
protein/kg body weight/day with 30 g protein/meal; n = 41; Protein) diet. Results
showed no group effect of the Protein treatment on markers of renal function
(estimated GFR, blood urea nitrogen, and creatinine), either upon intervention
completion or one year later. Our findings align with literature support for the 
benefits of higher protein in the diets of older individuals during obesity
reduction and help to confirm the safety of moderate increases in protein intake 
during weight loss in this population.

DOI: 10.1080/21551197.2018.1478696 
PMID: 29924703 


61. Gerontology. 2018;64(5):446-456. doi: 10.1159/000489172. Epub 2018 Jun 15.

HIV and Aging - Perhaps Not as Dramatic as We Feared?

Engel T(1), Raffenberg M(1), Marzolini C(2), Cavassini M(3), Kovari H(4), Hasse
B(4), Tarr PE(1).

Author information: 
(1)University Department of Medicine and Infectious Diseases Service,
Kantonsspital Baselland, University of Basel, Bruderholz, Switzerland.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases and Hospital Epidemiology, Departments of
Medicine and Clinical Research, University Hospital Basel, University of Basel,
Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois,
University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(4)Division of Infectious Diseases and Hospital Epidemiology, University Hospital
Zurich, University of Zurich, Zürich, Switzerland.

Ever since the introduction of highly active antiretroviral therapy (ART) in
1995, HIV infection has been linked to "metabolic" complications (insulin
resistance, dyslipidemia, osteoporosis, and others). Studies suggested increased 
rates of myocardial infarction, renal insufficiency, neurocognitive dysfunction, 
and fractures in HIV-postitive patients. Even long-term suppression of HIV seemed
to be accompanied by an excess of deleterious inflammation that could promote
these complications. The aims of this viewpoint paper are to summarize recent
data and to examine the possibility that the problem of aging-related morbidity
in HIV might not be as dramatic as previously believed.

© 2018 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000489172 
PMID: 29909411  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Curr Oncol Rep. 2018 Jun 13;20(8):64. doi: 10.1007/s11912-018-0705-y.

Toxicity of Cancer Therapies in Older Patients.

Le Saux O(1), Falandry C(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology Department, Centre Hospitalier Lyon Sud, Pierre-Bénite,
France. Olivia.le-saux@chu-lyon.fr.
(2)Geriatric Oncology Department, Centre Hospitalier Lyon Sud, Pierre-Bénite,
France.
(3)CarMen biomedical research laboratory (Cardiovascular diseases, Metabolism,
diabetology and Nutrition) INSERM UMR 1060, Université de Lyon, Oullins, France.

PURPOSE OF THE REVIEW: In clinical practice, older patients are often
undertreated due to underrepresentation in clinical trials and fear of toxicity. 
Our objective was therefore to review toxicities that are specific to older
cancer patients, to review risk factors in order to help physicians guide their
decisions, and to review interventions that can be implemented in routine
clinical practice to prevent toxicity induced by cancer therapies.
RECENT FINDINGS: On the whole, reviews report similar number and frequency as
well as similar grade 3 or 4 adverse events between subjects older and younger
than 65 years. Yet patients included in clinical trials are often not
representative of real-life patients and are often fit older cancer patients.
Moreover, tolerance to the additive impact of multiple adverse effects is
different between older and younger patients. And specific symptoms such as
stomatitis may cause a series of consequences such as dehydration, denutrition,
renal insufficiency, and adverse events of renally excreted drugs. Older patients
are at high risk of toxicity due to many factors but mainly due to the prevalence
of frailty in this population that has been estimated to be around 40% increasing
the risk of chemotherapy intolerance. As a consequence, interventions must be
implemented according to altered domains of comprehensive geriatric assessment in
order to improve anticancer tolerance. These interventions are reviewed here.

DOI: 10.1007/s11912-018-0705-y 
PMID: 29896642 


63. Kidney Blood Press Res. 2018;43(3):914-923. doi: 10.1159/000490470. Epub 2018 Jun
7.

Depression and Physical Frailty Have Additive Effect on the Nutritional Status
and Clinical Outcome of Chinese Peritoneal Dialysis.

Szeto CC, Chan GC, Ng JK, Chow KM, Kwan BC, Cheng PM, Kwong VW, Law MC, Leung CB,
Li PK.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Frailty and depression both contribute to malnutrition and
adverse clinical outcome of peritoneal dialysis (PD) patients. However, their
interaction is incompletely defined.
METHODS: We studied 178 adult Chinese PD patients. Physical frailty was assessed 
by a validated in-house questionnaire; depressive symptoms was screened by the
Geriatric Depression Scale; nutritional status was determined by subjective
global assessment (SGA) and malnutrition inflammation score (MIS). All patients
were followed for up to 24 months for survival and hospitalization analysis.
RESULTS: There were 111 patients (62.4%) physically frail, amongst those 48
(43.2%) had depressive symptoms. Only 1 patient had depressive symptoms without
frailty. There was an additive effect of depressive symptoms and physical frailty
on nutritional status. For the groups with no frailty, frail but no depressive
symptoms, and frail with depressive symptoms, serum albumin decreased in a
stepwise manner (35.8 ± 5.6, 34.9 ± 4.4, and 32.9 ± 5.3 g/L, respectively,
p=0.025); overall SGA score was 5.75 ± 0.61, 5.41 ± 0.59, and 5.04 ± 0.77,
respectively (p< 0.0001), and MIS was 5.12 ± 2.30, 7.13 ± 3.22, and 9.48 ± 3.97, 
respectively (p< 0.0001). At 24 months, patient survival was 86.6%, 71.4%, and
62.5% for patients with no frailty, frail but no depressive symptoms, and frail
with depressive symptoms, respective (p=0.001). The median number of hospital
stay was 8.04 (inter-quartile range [IQR] 0.91 - 19.42), 14.05 (IQR 3.57 -
37.27), and 26.62 (IQR 10.65 - 61.18) days per year of follow up, respectively
(p< 0.0001).
CONCLUSION: Physical frailty and depressive symptoms are both common in Chinese
PD patients, and they have additive adverse effect on the nutritional status and 
clinical outcome.

© 2018 The Author(s). Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000490470 
PMID: 29895003  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Int Urol Nephrol. 2018 Aug;50(8):1505-1510. doi: 10.1007/s11255-018-1900-3. Epub 
2018 Jun 4.

Kidney function and cognitive decline in frail elderly: two faces of the same
coin?

Coppolino G(1), Bolignano D(2), Gareri P(3), Ruberto C(3), Andreucci M(4),
Ruotolo G(5), Rocca M(3), Castagna A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Nephrology and Dialysis Unit, "Pugliese-Ciaccio" General Hospital, Via Michele
Torcia, 4, 88100, Catanzaro, Italy. gcoppolino@hotmail.it.
(2)Institute of Clinical Physiology, CNR - Italian National Council of Research, 
Reggio Calabria, Italy.
(3)Center for Cognitive Disorders and Dementia, Azienda Sanitaria Provinciale di 
Catanzaro, Catanzaro, Italy.
(4)Renal Unit, Department of Health Sciences, "Magna Graecia" University,
Catanzaro, Italy.
(5)Geriatric Unit, "Pugliese-Ciaccio" General Hospital, Catanzaro, Italy.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Cognitive and renal impairment are pervasive among elderly
frails, a high-risk, geriatric sub-population with peculiar clinical
characteristics. In a series of frail individuals with non-advanced chronic
kidney disease (CKD), we aimed at assessing the entity of functional, general
health and cognitive impairment and the possible relationship between these types
of dysfunction and the severity of renal impairment.
METHODS: 2229 geriatric subjects were screened for frailty and CKD. Severity of
CKD was assessed by eGFR (CKD-EPI formula). Frailty was established by the Fried 
Index. Functional, general health and cognitive status were assessed by validated
score measures.
RESULTS: Final analysis included 271 frail CKD subjects (162 women, 109 men).
Mean eGFR was 64.25 ± 25.04 mL/min/1.73 m2. Prevalence of mild-to-moderate CKD
(stage 3-4) was 44%. Twenty-six percent of patients had severe cognitive
impairment, while mild and moderate impairment was found in 7 and 67% of
individuals, respectively. All subjects had poor functional and general health
status. Cognitive capacities significantly decreased across CKD stages (p for
trend < 0.0001). In fully adjusted multivariate analyses, cognitive status
remained an independent predictor of eGFR (β = 0.465; p < 0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: Mild-to-moderate CKD is highly pervasive among frail elderly
individuals and the severity of renal dysfunction is independently correlated
with that of cognitive impairment. Future studies are advocated to clarify
whether the combination of kidney and mental dysfunction may portend a higher
risk of worsen outcomes in this high-risk population.

DOI: 10.1007/s11255-018-1900-3 
PMID: 29868939  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2019 Feb 1;34(2):346-354. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfy124.

Frailty, body composition and the risk of mortality in incident hemodialysis
patients: the Predictors of Arrhythmic and Cardiovascular Risk in End Stage Renal
Disease study.

Fitzpatrick J(1), Sozio SM(2)(3), Jaar BG(2)(3)(4)(5), Estrella MM(6), Segev
DL(3)(4)(7), Parekh RS(1)(2)(4)(8), McAdams-DeMarco MA(3)(4)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Child Health Evaluative Sciences, Research Institute, Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(3)Welch Center for Prevention, Epidemiology, and Clinical Research, Baltimore,
MD, USA.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(5)Nephrology Center of Maryland, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(6)Kidney Health Research Collaborative, Department of Medicine, University of
California, San Francisco and Department of Medicine, San Francisco VA Medical
Center, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(7)Department of Surgery, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(8)Division of Nephrology, Department of Pediatrics and Medicine, Hospital for
Sick Children, University Health Network and University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, 
Canada.

Background: Frail obese community-dwelling older adults are at increased
mortality risk. Among hemodialysis (HD) patients, frailty is common and
associated with increased mortality risk; however, in dialysis, obesity is
associated with decreased mortality risk. Whether the frail-obese phenotype is
associated with increased mortality risk among HD patients remains unclear.
Methods: This study included 370 incident HD patients enrolled in the Predictors 
of Arrhythmic and Cardiovascular Risk in End Stage Renal Disease (PACE) study. We
measured frailty using the Fried phenotype, general obesity [body mass index
(BMI) ≥30 kg/m2] and abdominal obesity [waist:hip ratio (WHR) ≥median WHR] and
estimated their associations with mortality.
Results: The mean age was 55 years, with 42% female, 73% African American, 57%
diabetic and 52% frail. Frail HD patients had higher mean BMI
(frail = 30.3 kg/m2, non-frail = 28.3 kg/m2; P = 0.02) and similar WHR (P = 0.8).
Twenty-two percent were frail with general obesity and 27% were frail with
abdominal obesity. Frailty was associated with 1.66-fold increased mortality risk
[95% confidence interval (CI) 1.03-2.67]. BMI was associated with a decreased
mortality risk [25.0-29.9 kg/m2 hazard ratio (HR) 0.53 (95% CI 0.31-0.93);
≥30 kg/m2 HR 0.34 (95% CI 0.19-0.62)]. Frailty was associated with elevated
mortality risk among HD patients with general [HR 3.77 (95% CI 1.10-12.92)] and
abdominal obesity [HR 2.38 (95% CI 1.17-4.82)]. Frailty was not associated with
mortality among HD patients without general or abdominal obesity.
Conclusions: In adults initiating HD, frailty was associated with elevated
mortality risk, even among the obese. Frail-obese HD patients may be a high-risk,
often-overlooked population, as obesity is assumed to be protective. Measurement 
of frailty and obesity may facilitate risk stratification.

DOI: 10.1093/ndt/gfy124 
PMCID: PMC6365769
PMID: 29868775 


66. Kidney Int Rep. 2017 Nov 28;3(3):530-541. doi: 10.1016/j.ekir.2017.11.017.
eCollection 2018 May.

Novel Therapies in Light Chain Amyloidosis.

Milani P(1), Merlini G(1), Palladini G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Amyloidosis Research and Treatment Center, Foundation "Istituto di Ricovero e 
Cura a Carattere Scientifico (IRCCS) Policlinico San Matteo," and Department of
Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.

Light chain (AL) amyloidosis is the most common form of amyloidosis involving the
kidney. It is characterized by albuminuria, progressing to overt nephrotic
syndrome and eventually end-stage renal failure if diagnosed late or
ineffectively treated, and in most cases by concomitant heart involvement.
Cardiac amyloidosis is the main determinant of survival, whereas the risk of
dialysis is predicted by baseline proteinuria and glomerular filtration rate, and
by response to therapy. The backbone of treatment is chemotherapy targeting the
underlying plasma cell clone, that needs to be risk-adapted due to the frailty of
patients with AL amyloidosis who have cardiac and/or multiorgan involvement.
Low-risk patients (∼20%) can be considered for autologous stem cell
transplantation that can be preceded by induction and/or followed by
consolidation with bortezomib-based regimens. Bortezomib combined with
alkylators, such as melphalan, preferred in patients harboring t(11;14), or
cyclophosphamide, is used in most intermediate-risk patients, and with cautious
dose escalation in high-risk subjects. Novel, powerful anti-plasma cell agents,
such as pomalidomide, ixazomib, and daratumumab, prove effective in the
relapsed/refractory setting, and are being moved to upfront therapy in clinical
trials. Novel approaches based on small molecules interfering with the
amyloidogenic process and on antibodies targeting the amyloid deposits gave
promising results in preliminary uncontrolled studies, are being tested in
controlled trials, and will likely prove powerful complements to chemotherapy.
Finally, improvements in the understanding of the molecular mechanisms of organ
damage are unveiling novel potential treatment targets, moving toward a cure for 
this dreadful disease.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ekir.2017.11.017 
PMCID: PMC5976806
PMID: 29854961 


67. Surg J (N Y). 2018 May 23;4(2):e66-e77. doi: 10.1055/s-0038-1655756. eCollection 
2018 Apr.

The Impact of Frailty on Postoperative Cardiopulmonary Complications in the
Emergency General Surgery Population.

Akyar S(1), Armenia SJ(1), Ratnani P(1), Merchant AM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, New Jersey Medical School, Rutgers Biomedical and
Health Sciences, Rutgers University, Newark, New Jersey.

Background  The burden of frail patients undergoing emergency general surgery
(EGS) is increasing rapidly and this population is particularly susceptible to
postoperative cardiopulmonary complications and mortality. We aimed to determine 
the association between frailty, as defined by the previously described modified 
frailty index (mFI), and postoperative respiratory complications (unplanned
reintubation, pneumonia, and prolonged ventilation), cardiac complications
(myocardial infarction and cardiac arrest), and mortality. We also sought to
identify the most significant determinants of frailty in the highest risk
patients based on the specific variables comprising the mFI. Methods  We
performed a retrospective observational analysis of the prospectively collected
American College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement Program
database. Files from 2005 to 2015 identified 132,765 inpatients who underwent
EGS. mFI scores were calculated for each patient. The effect of increasing
frailty on unplanned reintubation, pneumonia, prolonged ventilation, myocardial
infarction, cardiac arrest, and mortality was evaluated using bivariate analysis.
Multivariable logistic regression was used to compare mFI with additional
predictor variables including race, gender, physical status as defined by the
American Society of Anesthesiologists, disseminated cancer, renal failure,
smoking status, sepsis, wound presence/classification, dyspnea, and previous
ventilator dependence. Results  Unplanned reintubation, pneumonia, prolonged
ventilation, myocardial infarction, cardiac arrest, and mortality were
significantly associated with frailty, and the odds of each postoperative
complication increased with increasing mFI score. Of the frailest patients (mFI
≥3) that experienced cardiopulmonary complications or mortality, the variables of
the mFI that contributed most to frailty were hypertension requiring medication
and functional status before surgery. Conclusions  A higher mFI score is
associated with increased odds of postoperative cardiopulmonary complications and
mortality in the EGS population. Specific variables of the mFI can also provide
valuable information for assessing odds in the frailest patients undergoing EGS.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0038-1655756 
PMCID: PMC5966303
PMID: 29796424 


68. Clin Interv Aging. 2018 May 7;13:843-852. doi: 10.2147/CIA.S150673. eCollection
2018.

Using the Frailty Assessment for Care Planning Tool (FACT) to screen elderly
chronic kidney disease patients for frailty: the nurse experience.

Moffatt H(1), Moorhouse P(1)(2), Mallery L(1)(2), Landry D(1), Tennankore K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Nova Scotia Health Authority, Halifax, NS, Canada.
(2)Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada.

Purpose: Recent evidence supports the prognostic significance of frailty for
functional decline and poor health outcomes in patients with chronic kidney
disease. Yet, despite the development of clinical tools to screen for frailty,
little is known about the experiential impact of screening for frailty in this
setting. The Frailty Assessment for Care Planning Tool (FACT) evaluates frailty
across 4 domains: mobility, function, social circumstances, and cognition. The
purpose of this qualitative study was as follows: 1) explore the nurse experience
of screening for frailty using the FACT tool in a specialized outpatient renal
clinic; 2) determine how, if at all, provider perceptions of frailty changed
after implementation of the frailty screening tool; and 3) determine the
perceived factors that influence uptake and administration of the FACT screening 
tool in a specialized clinical setting.
Methods: A semi-structured interview of 5 nurses from the Nova Scotia Health
Authority, Central Zone Renal Clinic was conducted. A grounded theory approach
was used to generate thematic categories and analysis models.
Results: Four primary themes emerged in the data analysis: "we were skeptical",
"we made it work", "we learned how", and "we understand". As the renal nurses
gained a sense of confidence in their ability to implement the FACT tool, initial
barriers to implementation were attenuated. Implementation factors - such as
realistic goals, clear guidelines, and ongoing training - were important factors 
for successful uptake of the frailty screening initiative.
Conclusion: Nurse participants reported an overall positive experience using the 
FACT method to screen for frailty and indicated that their understanding of the
multiple dimensions and subtleties of "frailty" were enhanced. Future nurse-led
FACT screening initiatives should incorporate those factors identified as being
integral to program success: realistic goals, clear guidelines, and ongoing
training. Adopting the evaluation of frailty as a priority within clinical
departments will encourage sustainability.

DOI: 10.2147/CIA.S150673 
PMCID: PMC5944458
PMID: 29765209  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure Dr Mallery and Dr Moorhouse are the
co-creators of the FACT tool and the PATH model of care, and receive consultant
fees from institutions implementing the program for delivering a training program
for the PATH model of care. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in 
this work.


69. Oncotarget. 2018 Apr 3;9(25):17396-17405. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.24712.
eCollection 2018 Apr 3.

Clinical implication of a quantitative frailty assessment tool for prognosis in
patients with urological cancers.

Soma O(1), Hatakeyama S(1), Okamoto T(1), Fujita N(1), Matsumoto T(1), Tobisawa
Y(1), Yoneyama T(2), Yamamoto H(1), Yoneyama T(1), Hashimoto Y(2), Koie T(1),
Nakaji S(3), Ohyama C(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Hirosaki University Graduate School of Medicine,
Hirosaki, Japan.
(2)Department of Advanced Transplant and Regenerative Medicine, Hirosaki
University Graduate School of Medicine, Hirosaki, Japan.
(3)Department of Social Medicine, Hirosaki University School of Medicine,
Hirosaki, Japan.

Objectives: Optimal tools for evaluating frailty among urological cancer patients
remain unclear. We aimed to develop a quantitative frailty assessment tool
comparing healthy individuals and urological cancer patients, and investigate the
clinical implication of quantitative frailty on prognosis in urological cancer
patients.
Results: Gait speed, hemoglobin, serum albumin, exhaustion, and depression were
significantly worse in patients with all types of cancers than in pair-matched
controls. Frailty discriminant score (FDS) showed clear separation between
controls and urological cancer patients, and significant association with the
Fried criteria. Overall survivals were significantly shorter in patients with a
higher score (>2.30) than in those with a lower score among nonprostate cancer
(bladder, upper tract urothelial carcinoma, and renal cell carcinoma) patients.
In prostate cancer patients, overall survivals were significantly shorter in
patients with a higher score (>3.30) than in those with a lower score.
Conclusions: FDS was significantly associated with frailty and prognosis in
urological cancer patients. This tool for frailty assessment can help patients
and physicians make more informed decisions. Further validation study is needed.
Materials and Methods: Total 605 urological cancer patients presenting to our
hospital underwent a prospective frailty assessment. Controls were selected from 
2280 community-dwelling subjects. Frailty was assessed via physical status, blood
biochemical tests, and mental status. We compared frailty variables between
pair-matched controls and urological cancer patients. We developed FDS using
frailty variables, and compared with the Fried criteria. The influence of FDS on 
overall survivals was investigated by Kaplan-Meier analysis and Cox regression
analysis.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.24712 
PMCID: PMC5915123
PMID: 29707115 

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST All authors have declared
no conflicts of interests.


70. Nutrients. 2018 Apr 27;10(5). pii: E544. doi: 10.3390/nu10050544.

A Low-Protein Diet for Diabetic Kidney Disease: Its Effect and Molecular
Mechanism, an Approach from Animal Studies.

Kitada M(1)(2), Ogura Y(3), Monno I(4), Koya D(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetology and Endocrinology, Kanazawa Medical University,
Uchinada, Ishikawa 920-0293, Japan. kitta@kanazawa-med.ac.jp.
(2)Division of Anticipatory Molecular Food Science and Technology, Medical
Research Institute, Kanazawa Medical University, Uchinada, Ishikawa 920-0293,
Japan. kitta@kanazawa-med.ac.jp.
(3)Department of Diabetology and Endocrinology, Kanazawa Medical University,
Uchinada, Ishikawa 920-0293, Japan. namusan1192@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Diabetology and Endocrinology, Kanazawa Medical University,
Uchinada, Ishikawa 920-0293, Japan. imonno@kanazawa-med.ac.jp.
(5)Department of Diabetology and Endocrinology, Kanazawa Medical University,
Uchinada, Ishikawa 920-0293, Japan. koya0516@kanazawa-med.ac.jp.
(6)Division of Anticipatory Molecular Food Science and Technology, Medical
Research Institute, Kanazawa Medical University, Uchinada, Ishikawa 920-0293,
Japan. koya0516@kanazawa-med.ac.jp.

A low-protein diet (LPD) can be expected to retard renal function decline in
advanced stages of chronic kidney disease (CKD), including diabetic kidney
disease (DKD), and is recommended in a clinical setting. Regarding the molecular 
mechanisms of an LPD against DKD, previous animal studies have shown that an LPD 
exerts reno-protection through mainly the improvement of glomerular
hyperfiltration/hypertension due to the reduction of intraglomerular pressure. On
the other hand, we have demonstrated that an LPD, particularly a very-LPD (VLPD),
improved tubulo-interstitial damage, inflammation and fibrosis, through the
restoration of autophagy via the reduction of a mammalian target of rapamycin
complex 1 (mTORC1) activity in type 2 diabetes and obesity animal models. Thus,
based on animal studies, a VLPD may show a more beneficial effect against
advanced DKD. Previous clinical reports have also shown that a VLPD, not a
moderate LPD, slows the progression of renal dysfunction in patients with chronic
glomerular nephritis. However, there is insufficient clinical data regarding the 
beneficial effects of a VLPD against DKD. Additionally, the patients with CKD,
including DKD, are a high-risk group for malnutrition, such as protein⁻energy
wasting (PEW), sarcopenia, and frailty. Therefore, an LPD, including a VLPD,
should be prescribed to patients when the benefits of an LPD outweigh the risks, 
upon consideration of adherence, age, and nutritional status. As the future
predicts, the development of a VLPD replacement therapy without malnutrition may 
be expected for reno-protection against the advanced stages of DKD, through the
regulation of mTORC1 activity and adequate autophagy induction. However, further 
studies to elucidate detailed mechanisms by which a VLPD exerts reno-protection
are necessary.

DOI: 10.3390/nu10050544 
PMCID: PMC5986424
PMID: 29702558  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Rev Port Cir Cardiotorac Vasc. 2017 Jul-Dec;24(3-4):132.

Clinical Utility of Frailty Scales for the Prediction of Postoperative
Complications: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.

Rocha V(1), Marmelo F(2), Leite-Moreira A(2), Moreira-Gonçalves D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Cirurgia e Fisiologia; FMUP; Hospital de São Martinho,
Portugal.
(2)Departamento de Cirurgia e Fisiologia; FMUP, Portugal.
(3)Departamento de Cirurgia e Fisiologia; FMUP; CIAFEL; FAEUP, Portugal.

INTRODUCTION: Frailty can be defined as a biological syndrome of reduced reserve 
and resistance to stressful events. Evidence suggests that this syndrome is
linked to adverse outcomes in various surgical populations. Several instruments
have been developed to measure frailty, however there is no consensus about which
one is the most useful in the surgical population. Therefore, this study aims to 
evaluate the utility of different frailty scales in the prediction of
postoperative complications in older surgical population.
METHODS: This review and meta-analysis assembles prospective cohort studies
reporting frailty and postoperative outcomes. Searches were performed in
PubMed/Medline, Scielo, Cochrane Library and ScienceDirect databases. Statistical
analyses was performed using Review Manager software and the pooled Odds Rattios 
was calculated.
RESULTS: A total of 15 articles were included in the present review. Frailty was 
significantly associated with postoperative complications (OR=2.53, 95% CI:
2.07-3.10; p<0.00001), mortality until 30 days (OR=3.49, 95% CI: 2.40-5.09,
p<0.00001) and higher 1-year mortality (OR= 2.90, 95% CI: 1.99-4.24, p<0.00001), 
and with hospital length of stay >5days or >14days (OR=2.78, 95% CI: 1.45-5.30,
p=0.002 and OR=2.40 (95% CI: 1.08-5.36, p= 0.03, respectively). In addition, our 
meta-analysis showed that frailty is a significant predictor of renal failure
(OR=5.03, 95% CI: 1.74-14.54, p=0.003), neurological complications (OR= 3.41, 95%
CI: 1.08-10.73, p=0.04), respiratory complications (OR=9.21 (95% CI: 2.35- 36.02,
p=0.001), wound infection (OR=2.85 (95% CI: 1.65-4.94, p=0.0002) and sepsis
(OR=3.84 (95% CI: 1.37-10.71, p=0.01).
CONCLUSION: Overall, frailty significantly increases the risk for developing
adverse outcomes after surgery, so early detection of frailty may be a window of 
opportunity for intervention and a key factor for improving clinical outcomes.
Moreover, future studies are required for the standardization of the frailty
scales used.


PMID: 29701364 


72. Transplantation. 2018 Oct;102(10):1740-1746. doi: 10.1097/TP.0000000000002213.

Frailty, Inflammatory Markers, and Waitlist Mortality Among Patients With
End-stage Renal Disease in a Prospective Cohort Study.

McAdams-DeMarco MA(1)(2), Ying H(1), Thomas AG(1), Warsame F(1), Shaffer
AA(1)(2), Haugen CE(1), Garonzik-Wang JM(1), Desai NM(1), Varadhan R(3), Walston 
J(4), Norman SP(5), Segev DL(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
MD.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins School of Public Health, Baltimore, 
MD.
(3)Department of Oncology, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Baltimore, 
MD.
(4)Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD.
(5)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Michigan School of Medicine, Ann Arbor, MI.

BACKGROUND: Among community-dwelling older adults, frailty is associated with
heightened markers of inflammation and subsequent mortality. Although frailty is 
common among end-stage renal disease (ESRD) patients, the role of frailty and
markers of inflammation in this population remains unclear. We quantified these
associations in patients on the kidney transplant waitlist and tested whether
frailty and/or markers of inflammation improve waitlist mortality risk
prediction.
METHODS: We studied 1975 ESRD patients on the kidney transplant waitlist
(November 1, 2009, to February 28, 2017) in a multi-center cohort study of
frailty. Serum inflammatory markers (interleukin-6 [IL-6], soluble tumor necrosis
factor-α receptor-1 [sTNFR1], and C-reactive protein [CRP]) were analyzed in 605 
of these participants; we calculated the inflammatory index score using IL-6 and 
sTNFR1. We compared the C-statistic of an established registry-based prediction
model for waitlist mortality adding frailty and/or inflammatory markers (1 SD
change in log IL-6, sTNFR1, CRP, or inflammatory index).
RESULTS: The registry-based model had moderate predictive ability (c-statistic = 
0.655). Frailty was associated with increased mortality (2.19; 95% confidence
interval [CI], 1.26-3.79) but did not improve risk prediction (c-statistic =
0.646; P = 0.65). Like frailty, IL-6 (2.13; 95% CI, 1.41-3.22), sTNFR1 (1.70; 95%
CI, 1.12-2.59), CRP (1.68; 95% CI, 1.06-2.67), and the inflammatory index (2.09; 
95% CI, 1.38-3.16) were associated with increased mortality risk; unlike frailty,
adding IL-6 (c-statistic = 0.777; P = 0.02), CRP (c-statistic = 0.728; P = 0.02),
or inflammatory index (c-statistic = 0.777; P = 0.02) substantially improved
mortality risk prediction.
CONCLUSIONS: Frailty and markers of inflammation were associated with increased
waitlist mortality risk, but only markers of inflammation significantly improved 
ESRD risk prediction. These findings help clarify the accelerated aging
physiology of ESRD and highlight easy-to-measure markers of increased waitlist
mortality risk.

DOI: 10.1097/TP.0000000000002213 
PMCID: PMC6153033 [Available on 2019-10-01]
PMID: 29677074 


73. Updates Surg. 2018 Apr 16. doi: 10.1007/s13304-018-0531-7. [Epub ahead of print]

Laparoscopic versus open colectomy: the impact of frailty on outcomes.

Kothari P(1), Congiusta DV(1), Merchant AM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, New Jersey Medical School, Rutgers Biomedical and
Health Sciences, 185 South Orange Avenue, Suite MSB G530, Newark, NJ, 07103, USA.
(2)Department of Surgery, New Jersey Medical School, Rutgers Biomedical and
Health Sciences, 185 South Orange Avenue, Suite MSB G530, Newark, NJ, 07103, USA.
Aziz.Merchant@rutgers.edu.

Frailty in the elderly population is an important predictor of surgical outcomes.
It has been quantified by several models, including the modified frailty index,
which has demonstrated applicability in many surgical subspecialties. We aim to
conduct the first decade-long retrospective analysis of frailty and complications
between open and laparoscopic colectomy. We used the American College of Surgeons
National Surgical Quality Improvement Program database to identify colectomies
performed between 2005 and 2014. Our primary outcome was 30-day mortality.
Secondary outcomes were grouped into five categories: wound, hematologic,
pulmonary, renal, or cardiac/vascular complications. Chi-square and multivariate 
logistic regression were used to identify significant predictors of outcomes. Of 
the 244,639 colectomies identified in our data set, 117,064 cases were included
after exclusion criteria were applied. 42,192 (36%) cases were laparoscopic.
Mortality rates among open colectomies in mFI cohorts 0, 1, 2, 3, and ≥ 4 were
1.2, 3.4, 7.9, 14.3, and 20.3%, respectively, while rates in laparoscopic
colectomies 0.2, 0.7, 2, 3.5, and 5.4%, respectively (p < 0.05). Logistic
regression showed increase likelihood of mortality with open colectomies in all
mFI cohorts (p < 0.05). The open approach also had statistically significant
higher rates of secondary outcomes in nearly all frailty levels. Our study
analyzed the relationship of frailty, approach to colectomy, and postoperative
complications. Laparoscopic colectomies resulted in lower mortality rates as well
as less wound, hematologic, pulmonary, renal, and cardiovascular complications.

DOI: 10.1007/s13304-018-0531-7 
PMID: 29663301 


74. Clin Kidney J. 2018 Apr;11(2):236-245. doi: 10.1093/ckj/sfx134. Epub 2017 Dec 2.

Frailty and chronic kidney disease: current evidence and continuing
uncertainties.

Nixon AC(1)(2), Bampouras TM(3), Pendleton N(4), Woywodt A(1), Mitra S(5),
Dhaygude A(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Renal Medicine, Lancashire Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation
Trust, Preston, UK.
(2)Division of Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(3)Active Ageing Research Group, University of Cumbria, Carlisle, UK.
(4)Division of Neuroscience and Experimental Psychology, University of
Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(5)Manchester Academy of Health Sciences Centre and NIHR Devices for Dignity,
Health Technology Cooperative, Manchester, UK.

Frailty, the state of increased vulnerability to physical stressors as a result
of progressive and sustained degeneration in multiple physiological systems, is
common in those with chronic kidney disease (CKD). In fact, the prevalence of
frailty in the older adult population is reported to be 11%, whereas the
prevalence of frailty has been reported to be greater than 60% in
dialysis-dependent CKD patients. Frailty is independently linked with adverse
clinical outcomes in all stages of CKD and has been repeatedly shown to be
associated with an increased risk of mortality and hospitalization. In recent
years there have been efforts to create an operationalized definition of frailty 
to aid its diagnosis and to categorize its severity. Two principal concepts are
described, namely the Fried Phenotype Model of Physical Frailty and the
Cumulative Deficit Model of Frailty. There is no agreement on which frailty
assessment approach is superior, therefore, for the time being, emphasis should
be placed on any efforts to identify frailty. Recognizing frailty should prompt a
holistic assessment of the patient to address risk factors that may exacerbate
its progression and to ensure that the patient has appropriate psychological and 
social support. Adequate nutritional intake is essential and individualized
exercise programmes should be offered. The acknowledgement of frailty should
prompt discussions that explore the future care wishes of these vulnerable
patients. With further study, nephrologists may be able to use frailty
assessments to inform discussions with patients about the initiation of renal
replacement therapy.

DOI: 10.1093/ckj/sfx134 
PMCID: PMC5888002
PMID: 29644065 


75. Aging Clin Exp Res. 2019 Jan;31(1):75-83. doi: 10.1007/s40520-018-0946-5. Epub
2018 Apr 9.

Elevated post-void residual volume in a geriatric post-hip fracture assessment in
women-associated factors and risk of mortality.

Nuotio MS(1), Luukkaala T(2)(3), Tammela T(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Seinäjoki Central Hospital, Hanneksenrinne
7, 60220, Seinäjoki, Finland. maria.nuotio@fimnet.fi.
(2)Science Center, Pirkanmaa Hospital District, Tampere, Finland.
(3)School of Health Sciences, University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland.
(4)Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine and Life Sciences, University of
Tampere, Tampere, Finland.
(5)Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Multiple factors contribute to elevated post-void residual
urine volumes (PVR), but they may indicate detrusor underactivity (DU),
especially in older women. The aim here was to examine factors associated with
and prognostic significance of elevated PVR in a geriatric post-hip fracture
assessment in a female population.
METHODS: Consecutive female hip fracture patients (n = 409) aged 65 years and
older were included. PVR was measured by bladder scanner. PVR of 160 ml or more
was deemed elevated. Age-adjusted univariate logistic regression analyses were
conducted to examine the association of the domains of the comprehensive
geriatric assessment (CGA) with elevated PVR. Cox proportional hazards model was 
used to determine the age-adjusted association of an elevated PVR with 1-year
mortality.
RESULTS: Of the patients, 64 (15.6%) had elevated PVR. Having urinary or fecal
incontinence, difficulties in physical activities of daily living, malnutrition, 
poor performance on Timed Up and Go and Elderly Mobility Scale were significantly
associated with elevated PVR. Difficulties in instrumental activities of daily
living, renal dysfunction, constipation, polypharmacy, nocturia, cognitive
impairment and depressive mood were not associated with elevated PVR. Elevated
PVR significantly increased the risk of mortality 1 year post hip fracture.
CONCLUSIONS: Elevated PVR is relatively common in older female hip fracture
patients and associated with physical functioning, malnutrition and risk of
mortality. Even though a causal relationship cannot be confirmed, the findings
may suggest a relationship between DU and physical frailty. PVR deserves to be
included in the CGA of frail older patients including women.

DOI: 10.1007/s40520-018-0946-5 
PMID: 29633169 


76. Am J Med. 2018 Oct;131(10):1251-1256.e2. doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2018.03.012. Epub 
2018 Apr 4.

Is Frailty a Predictor of Outcomes in Elderly Inpatients with Acute Kidney
Injury? A Prospective Cohort Study.

Morton S(1), Isted A(1), Avery P(1), Wang J(2).

Author information: 
(1)St George's Hospital, London, UK.
(2)St George's Hospital, London, UK. Electronic address: joe.wang@nhs.net.

BACKGROUND: Frailty and acute kidney injury are independently associated with an 
increased risk of morbidity and mortality. The degree of frailty can be assessed 
by the Clinical Frailty Score (CFS). This study assessed whether an individual's 
CFS was associated with acute kidney injury in acute elderly medical admissions
and recorded the short-term outcomes.
METHODS: This was a single-center prospective observational cohort study. All
patients aged ≥65 years admitted under an acute medical take over 12
nonconsecutive days were included. Patient demographics, comorbidities, baseline 
CFS, and renal status on admission were recorded. Outcomes of death, length of
stay, and hospital re-attendance were assessed 2 weeks following admission.
RESULTS: Of 164 patients (77 males), 19% had acute kidney injury on admission and
22% were considered severely frail. Severe frailty was associated with acute
kidney injury (P = .01) and death within 2 weeks (P = .01). Two-week mortality
was highest among patients with both (36%).
CONCLUSION: The incidence of acute kidney injury in "severely frail" acutely
unwell elderly patients is significantly higher and associated with an increased 
short-term mortality. The CFS may be useful in acute illness to guide clinical
decisions in elderly patients.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2018.03.012 
PMID: 29626429 


77. J Cardiol. 2018 Oct;72(4):300-306. doi: 10.1016/j.jjcc.2018.02.018. Epub 2018 Apr
3.

Prospective observational study in elderly patients with non-valvular atrial
fibrillation: Rationale and design of the All Nippon AF In the Elderly (ANAFIE)
Registry.

Inoue H(1), Yamashita T(2), Akao M(3), Atarashi H(4), Ikeda T(5), Okumura K(6),
Koretsune Y(7), Shimizu W(8), Tsutsui H(9), Toyoda K(10), Hirayama A(11), Yasaka 
M(12), Yamaguchi T(13), Akishita M(14), Hasebe N(15), Kario K(16), Mizokami
Y(17), Nagata K(18), Nakamura M(19), Terauchi Y(20), Yamamoto T(21), Teramukai
S(22), Kimura T(23), Kaburagi J(23), Takita A(24).

Author information: 
(1)Saiseikai Toyama Hospital, Toyama, Japan. Electronic address:
h-inoue@saiseikai-toyama.jp.
(2)The Cardiovascular Institute, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Cardiology, National Hospital Organization Kyoto Medical Center,
Kyoto, Japan.
(4)Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Toho University Faculty of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Division of Cardiology, Saiseikai Kumamoto Hospital Cardiovascular Center,
Kumamoto, Japan.
(7)Institute for Clinical Research, National Hospital Organization Osaka National
Hospital, Osaka, Japan.
(8)Division of Cardiology, Nippon Medical School Department of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan.
(9)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Kyushu University Graduate School of
Medical Science, Fukuoka, Japan.
(10)Department of Cerebrovascular Medicine, National Cerebral and Cardiovascular 
Center, Osaka, Japan.
(11)Department of Cardiology, Nihon University Itabashi Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(12)Department of Cerebrovascular Medicine and Neurology, Cerebrovascular Center,
National Hospital Organization Kyushu Medical Center, Fukuoka, Japan.
(13)National Cerebral and Cardiovascular Center, Osaka, Japan.
(14)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, The University
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(15)First Department of Internal Medicine, Asahikawa Medical College, Hokkaido,
Japan.
(16)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, Jichi Medical
University School of Medicine, Tochigi, Japan.
(17)Division of Gastroenterology, University of Tsukuba Hospital, Ibaraki, Japan.
(18)Clinical Research Institute, Yokohama General Hospital, Kanagawa, Japan.
(19)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Ohashi Hospital Medical Center, Toho
University, Tokyo, Japan.
(20)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Graduate School of Medicine,
Yokohama City University, Kanagawa, Japan.
(21)Department of Internal Medicine, Teikyo University School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan.
(22)Department of Biostatistics, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyoto
Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.
(23)Medical Science Department, Daiichi Sankyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(24)Safety and Risk Management Department, Daiichi Sankyo, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Although anticoagulation effectively prevents stroke in patients with
atrial fibrillation (AF), it has been underused in elderly AF patients for many
reasons, mainly because of knowledge gaps regarding cardiovascular treatment of
these populations with multiple comorbidities and poor prognosis. The objectives 
of the All Nippon AF In the Elderly (ANAFIE) Registry are to collect real-world
information about the clinical status of patients with non-valvular AF (NVAF)
aged ≥75 years, current status of anticoagulant therapy, and prognosis
with/without anticoagulation to establish a database for this specific patient
population that is increasing remarkably worldwide.
METHODS AND DESIGN: The ANAFIE Registry is an observational, multicenter,
prospective study of Japanese patients with NVAF aged ≥75 years that will include
30,000 patients and have the primary endpoint of composite of stroke and systemic
embolism over a 2-year follow-up period. In parallel with the main study, seven
sub-cohort studies will be conducted with assessments including
coagulation-fibrinolysis markers, echocardiography, heart rate, hypertension,
cognitive function, frailty, and medication adherence. Subgroup analyses will be 
performed, and stratified by renal function, HbA1c, and maximum number of drugs
used. The study was started in October 2016, with a planned 2-year recruitment
period. As of January 31, 2018, 33,213 patients were enrolled; the recruitment
was therefore ended 8 months earlier than the original plan.
CONCLUSIONS: The ANAFIE Registry will provide a valuable database for the
clinical status, management, and outcomes of mortality, stroke, systemic
embolism, and hemorrhagic events with/without anticoagulation in the increasing
population of elderly NVAF patients, and will identify risk factors associated
with these clinical events.

Copyright © 2018 Japanese College of Cardiology. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jjcc.2018.02.018 
PMID: 29625717 


78. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2018 Apr;66(4):679-686. doi: 10.1111/jgs.15236. Epub 2018 Mar
30.

Syncope, Hypotension, and Falls in the Treatment of Hypertension: Results from
the Randomized Clinical Systolic Blood Pressure Intervention Trial.

Sink KM(1), Evans GW(2), Shorr RI(3)(4), Bates JT(5)(6), Berlowitz D(7)(8)(9),
Conroy MB(10), Felton DM(2), Gure T(11), Johnson KC(12), Kitzman D(13), Lyles
MF(1), Servilla K(14), Supiano MA(15)(16), Whittle J(17)(18), Wiggers A(19), Fine
LJ(20).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Section on Department of Geriatric Medicine, School of
Medicine, Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina.
(2)Division of Public Health Sciences, School of Medicine, Wake Forest
University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina.
(3)Malcom Randall Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Gainesville, Florida.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida.
(5)Michael E. DeBakey Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Houston, Texas.
(6)Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas.
(7)Bedford Veterans Affairs Hospital, Bedford, Massachusetts.
(8)School of Medicine, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts.
(9)School of Public Health, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts.
(10)Division of General Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah.
(11)Division of General Internal Medicine and Geriatrics, Wexner Medical Center, 
Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.
(12)Department of Preventive Medicine, University of Tennessee Health Science
Center, Memphis, Tennessee.
(13)Department of Cardiology, School of Medicine, Wake Forest University,
Winston-Salem, North Carolina.
(14)Renal Section, New Mexico VA Health Care System, Albuquerque, New Mexico.
(15)Division of Geriatrics, School of Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake
City, Utah.
(16)Department of Veterans, Geriatric Research, Education and Clinical Center,
Salt Lake City, Utah.
(17)Primary Care Division, Clement J. Zablocki Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
(18)Department of Medicine, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
(19)Department of Primary Care, Heritage College of Osteopathic Medicine, Ohio
University Cleveland Campus, Cleveland, Ohio.
(20)National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland.

OBJECTIVE: To determine predictors of serious adverse events (SAEs) involving
syncope, hypotension, and falls, with particular attention to age, in the
Systolic Blood Pressure Intervention Trial.
DESIGN: Randomized clinical trial.
SETTING: Academic and private practices across the United States (N = 102).
PARTICIPANTS: Adults aged 50 and older with a systolic blood pressure (SBP) of
130 to 180 mmHg at high risk of cardiovascular disease events, but without
diabetes, history of stroke, symptomatic heart failure or ejection fraction less 
than 35%, dementia, or standing SBP less than 110 mmHg (N = 9,361).
INTERVENTION: Treatment of SBP to a goal of less than 120 mmHg or 140 mmHg.
MEASUREMENTS: Outcomes were SAEs involving syncope, hypotension, and falls.
Predictors were treatment assignment, demographic characteristics, comorbidities,
baseline measurements, and baseline use of cardiovascular medications.
RESULTS: One hundred seventy-two (1.8%) participants had SAEs involving syncope, 
155 (1.6%) hypotension, and 203 (2.2%) falls. Randomization to intensive SBP
control was associated with greater risk of an SAE involving hypotension (hazard 
ratio (HR) = 1.67, 95% confidence interval (CI) = 1.21-2.32, P = .002), and
possibly syncope (HR = 1.32, 95% CI = 0.98-1.79, P = .07), but not falls
(HR = 0.98, 95% CI = 0.75-1.29, P = .90). Risk of all three outcomes was higher
for participants with chronic kidney disease or frailty. Older age was also
associated with greater risk of syncope, hypotension, and falls, but there was no
age-by-treatment interaction for any of the SAE outcomes.
CONCLUSIONS: Participants randomized to intensive SBP control had greater risk of
hypotension and possibly syncope, but not falls. The greater risk of developing
these events associated with intensive treatment did not vary according to age.

© 2018, Copyright the Authors Journal compilation © 2018, The American Geriatrics
Society.

DOI: 10.1111/jgs.15236 
PMID: 29601076 


79. J Palliat Med. 2018 Apr;21(4):546-551. doi: 10.1089/jpm.2018.0087.

Ten Tips Nephrologists Wish the Palliative Care Team Knew About Caring for
Patients with Kidney Disease.

Bansal AD(1), Leonberg-Yoo A(2), Schell JO(1), Scherer JS(3), Jones CA(4).

Author information: 
(1)1 Section of Palliative Care and Medical Ethics, Renal-Electrolyte Division,
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh Medical
Center , Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(2)2 Division of Nephrology, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of
Pennsylvania , Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(3)3 Division of Palliative Care and Nephrology, New York University School of
Medicine , New York, New York.
(4)4 Perelman School of Medicine and Palliative and Advanced Illness Research
Center, University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

Many patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) and end-stage renal disease have 
unmet palliative care (PC) needs. Physical and emotional symptoms are common.
Some, like uremia and fluid overload, improve with dialysis, but the increasing
age of patients initiating renal replacement therapy leaves many untreatable
comorbidities like dementia and frailty to negatively impact quality of life.
Written by nephrologists and PC clinicians, this article will help PC providers
to have a richer understanding of kidney disease-related symptom burden, disease 
trajectory, prognosis, and barriers to hospice enrollment for patients with CKD
and end-stage renal disease.

DOI: 10.1089/jpm.2018.0087 
PMID: 29596042 


80. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2018 Mar 26;11(6):581-589. doi:
10.1016/j.jcin.2018.01.242.

Inclusion of Functional Status Measures in the Risk Adjustment of 30-Day
Mortality After Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement: A Report From the Society
of Thoracic Surgeons/American College of Cardiology TVT Registry.

Arnold SV(1), O'Brien SM(2), Vemulapalli S(2), Cohen DJ(3), Stebbins A(2),
Brennan JM(2), Shahian DM(4), Grover FL(5), Holmes DR(6), Thourani VH(7),
Peterson ED(2), Edwards FH(8); STS/ACC TVT Registry.

Author information: 
(1)Saint Luke's Mid America Heart Institute and the University of Missouri-Kansas
City, Kansas City, Missouri. Electronic address: suz.v.arnold@gmail.com.
(2)Duke University, Durham, North Carolina.
(3)Saint Luke's Mid America Heart Institute and the University of Missouri-Kansas
City, Kansas City, Missouri.
(4)Lahey Hospital and Medical Center and Harvard Clinical Research Institute,
Boston, Massachusetts.
(5)University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado.
(6)Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(7)Medstar Washington Hospital Center/Georgetown University, Washington, District
of Columbia.
(8)University of Florida College of Medicine-Jacksonville, Jacksonville, Florida.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to develop and validate a risk adjustment
model for 30-day mortality after transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR)
that accounted for both standard clinical factors and pre-procedural health
status and frailty.
BACKGROUND: Assessment of risk for TAVR is important both for patient selection
and provider comparisons. Prior efforts for risk adjustment have focused on
in-hospital mortality, which is easily obtainable but can be biased because of
early discharge of ill patients.
METHODS: Using data from patients who underwent TAVR as part of the Society of
Thoracic Surgeons/American College of Cardiology TVT (Transcatheter Valve
Therapy) Registry (June 2013 to May 2016), a hierarchical logistic regression
model to estimate risk for 30-day mortality after TAVR based only on
pre-procedural factors and access site was developed and internally validated.
The model included factors from the original TVT Registry in-hospital mortality
model but added the Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire (health status) and 
gait speed (5-m walk test).
RESULTS: Among 21,661 TAVR patients at 188 sites, 1,025 (4.7%) died within 30
days. Independent predictors of 30-day death included older age, low body weight,
worse renal function, peripheral artery disease, home oxygen, prior myocardial
infarction, left main coronary artery disease, tricuspid regurgitation,
nonfemoral access, worse baseline health status, and inability to walk. The
predicted 30-day mortality risk ranged from 1.1% (lowest decile of risk) to 13.8%
(highest decile of risk). The model was able to stratify risk on the basis of
patient factors with good discrimination (C = 0.71 [derivation], C = 0.70
[split-sample validation]) and excellent calibration, both overall and in key
patient subgroups.
CONCLUSIONS: A clinical risk model was developed for 30-day death after TAVR that
included clinical data as well as health status and frailty. This model will
facilitate tracking outcomes over time as TAVR expands to lower risk patients and
to less experienced sites and will allow an objective comparison of short-term
mortality rates across centers.

Copyright © 2018 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcin.2018.01.242 
PMCID: PMC5868746 [Available on 2019-03-26]
PMID: 29566805 


81. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2018 May 1;33(5):742-750. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfy042.

Is Kt/V useful in elderly dialysis patients? Pro and Con arguments.

Tattersall J(1), Farrington K(2)(3), Gentile G(4), Kooman J(5), Macias Núñez
JF(6), Nistor I(7), Van Biesen W(8), Covic A(7); European Renal Best Practice
Guidelines Group and the European Union of Geriatric Medicine Societies (EUGMS)
collaborative group for the production of guidelines on the management of older
patients with CKD.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Unit, St James's University Hospital, Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS
Trust, Leeds, UK.
(2)Renal Unit, Lister Hospital, Stevenage, Hertfordshire, UK.
(3)Centre for Health Services and Clinical Research, University of Hertfordshire,
Hatfield, UK.
(4)Department of Renal Medicine, Royal Cornwall Hospitals NHS Trust, Truro, UK.
(5)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, Maastricht University
Medical Centre, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(6)Faculty of Medicine, University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain.
(7)Department of Nephrology "Dr CI Parhon" Hospital, Iasi, Romania.
(8)Department of Nephrology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.

Current guidelines for dialysis specify a minimum Kt/V. For haemodialysis (HD)
patients, minimum treatment time and frequency is also specified. The guidelines 
allow for modification to take account of renal function. The guidelines are not 
specifically aimed at the elderly and may not be appropriate for all patients in 
this group. Increasing age is accompanied by physiological and pathological
changes that may modify the patient's response to uraemia and dialysis. Frailty
and multi-morbidity are likely, but to a variable extent. Elderly patients could 
be more susceptible to the effects of uraemia and require a higher dose of
dialysis. Conversely, the generation rate of uraemic toxins is lower in elderly
patients, potentially reducing the need for dialysis. In the elderly, quality of 
life may be more adversely affected by multimorbidity than uraemic symptoms, thus
the dose of dialysis may be less relevant. Higher doses of dialysis may be more
difficult to achieve in the elderly and may be less well tolerated. We conclude
that the prescription of dialysis in the elderly should be individualized, taking
multiple factors into account. An individualized Kt/V may be useful in
controlling dialysis dose and detecting problems in delivery. However,
achievement of a specified Kt/V may not result in any benefit to an elderly
patient and could be counterproductive.

DOI: 10.1093/ndt/gfy042 
PMID: 29566211 


82. Pharmacol Res. 2018 Apr;130:303-307. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2018.02.031. Epub 2018
Mar 6.

Personalized immunosuppression in elderly renal transplant recipients.

Peeters LEJ(1), Andrews LM(1), Hesselink DA(2), de Winter BCM(1), van Gelder
T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Hospital Pharmacy, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Departments of Internal Medicine, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Departments of Hospital Pharmacy, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center
Rotterdam, The Netherlands; Departments of Internal Medicine, Erasmus MC,
University Medical Center Rotterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic address:
t.vangelder@erasmusmc.nl.

The number of elderly people has increased considerably over the last decades,
due to a rising life expectancy and ageing populations. As a result, an increased
number of elderly with end-stage-renal-disease are diagnosed, for which the
preferred treatment is renal transplantation. Over the past years the awareness
of the elderly as a specific patient population has grown, which increases the
importance of research in this group. Elderly patients often receive kidneys from
elderly donors while younger donor kidneys are preferentially reserved for
younger recipients. Although the rate of acute rejection after transplantation is
lower in the elderly, these rejections may lead to graft loss more frequently, as
kidneys from elderly donors have marginal reserve capacity. To prevent acute
rejection, immunosuppressive therapy is needed. On the other hand, elderly
patients have a higher risk to die from infectious complications, and thus less
immunosuppression would be preferable. Immunosuppressive treatment in the elderly
is complicated further by changes in the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics,
with increasing age. Adjustments in standard immunosuppressive regimes are
therefore suggested for this population. An unmet need in transplantation
medicine is a tool to guide a personalized approach to immunosuppression.
Recently several promising biomarkers that identify injury to the graft at an
early stage or predict acute rejection have been identified. Unfortunately, none 
of these biomarkers were tested specifically in the elderly. We believe there is 
an urgent need to perform clinical trials investigating novel immunosuppressive
regimens in conjunction with biomarker studies in this specific population.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phrs.2018.02.031 
PMID: 29501679  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Can J Kidney Health Dis. 2018 Feb 19;5:2054358117753615. doi:
10.1177/2054358117753615. eCollection 2018.

Impact of Exercise Counseling on Physical Function in Chronic Kidney Disease: An 
Observational Study.

Bohm CJ(1), Storsley LJ(1), Hiebert BM(2), Nelko S(3), Tangri N(1)(4), Cheskin
LJ(5), McAdams-DeMarco MA(6), Rigatto C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Max Rady College of Medicine, University of
Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada.
(2)Cardiac Sciences Program, Winnipeg Regional Health Authority, Manitoba,
Canada.
(3)Max Rady College of Medicine, Rady Faculty of Health Sciences, University of
Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada.
(4)Department of Community Health Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg,
Canada.
(5)Department of Health, Behavior and Society, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of 
Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(6)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health,
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Background: Individuals with chronic kidney disease (CKD) have low levels of
physical activity and physical function. Although guidelines endorse exercise
counseling for individuals with CKD, it is not yet part of routine care.
Objective: We investigated the effect of attending a real-life exercise
counseling clinic (ECC) on physical function in individuals with CKD.
Design: Retrospective analysis of prospectively collected observational data with
quasi-experimental design.
Setting and Participants: Patients with all stages of CKD registered in a large
provincial renal program were eligible. The exposed cohort who attended the ECC
between January 1, 2011, and March 15, 2014, included 214 individuals. The
control cohort included 292 individuals enrolled in an observational study
investigating longitudinal change in frailty during the same time period.
Predictor/Factor: Attendance at an ECC.
Outcomes and Measurements: Change in physical function as measured by Short
Physical Performance Battery (SPPB) score, physical activity level (Human
Activity Profile [HAP]/Physical Activity Scale for the Elderly [PASE]), and
health-related quality of life (HRQOL; EQ5D/VAS) over 1 year.
Results: Eighty-seven individuals in the ECC cohort and 125 participants in the
control cohort completed 1-year follow-up. Baseline median SPPB score was 10
(interquartile range [IQR]: 9-12) and 9 (IQR: 7-11) in the ECC and control
cohorts, respectively (P < .01). At 1 year, SPPB scores were 10 (IQR: 8-12) and 9
(IQR: 6-11) in the ECC and control cohorts, respectively (P = .04). Mean change
in SPPB over 1 year was not significantly different between groups: -0.33 (95%
confidence interval [CI]: -0.81 to 0.15) in ECC and -0.22 (95% CI: -0.61 to 0.17)
in control (P = .72). There was no significant difference in the proportion of
individuals in each cohort with an increase/decrease in SPPB score over time.
There was no significant change in physical activity or HRQOL over time between
groups.
Limitations: Quasi-experimental design, low rate of follow-up attendance.
Conclusions: In this pragmatic study, exercise counseling had no significant
effect on change in SPPB score, suggesting that a single exercise counseling
session alone is inadequate to improve physical function in CKD.

Publisher: Les personnes atteintes d’insuffisance rénale chronique (IRC) ont des 
capacités physiques réduites et sont généralement peu actives physiquement. Bien 
que les recommandations aillent dans le sens d’encourager ces patients à adopter 
un programme d’exercices, on observe que cela ne fait toujours pas partie de la
routine de soins.Mesurer l’effet de la fréquentation d’une clinique de
consultation en entraînement (CCE) sur la condition physique des individus
atteints d’IRC.Il s’agit d’un modèle d’étude quasi expérimental sous forme d’une 
analyse rétrospective de données observationnelles colligées
prospectivement.Étaient admissibles tous les patients atteints d’IRC, peu importe
le stade, inscrits à un vaste programme de santé rénale provincial. La cohorte
exposée, soit les patients ayant fréquenté une CCE entre le 1er janvier 2011 et
le 15 mars 2014, était composée de 214 sujets. La cohorte contrôle était
constituée de 292 individus participant à une étude observationnelle qui évaluait
les changements longitudinaux de fragilité physique pendant la même période.La
fréquentation d’une CCE.Pendant un an, on a mesuré le niveau d’activité physique,
la qualité de vie relative à l’état de santé et les changements dans les
capacités physiques des participants (test SPPB - Short Physical Performance
Battery Score).Seuls 87 patients de la cohorte exposée et 125 de la cohorte
contrôle ont complété le suivi. Les médianes initiales au test SPPB étaient de 10
(EI: 9-12) et de 9 (EI: 7-11) respectivement (p < 0,01). Après un an, les scores 
au test SPPB étaient pratiquement inchangés: médiane de 10 (EI: 8-12) pour la
cohorte exposée et de 9 pour la cohorte contrôle (EI: 6-11) (p = 0,04). Pendant
l’année du suivi, la variation moyenne du score au test SPPB a été semblable dans
les deux groupes: −0,33 (IC 95 % −0,81 à 0,15) dans la cohorte exposée et −0,22
(IC 95 % −0,61 à 0,17) dans le groupe contrôle (p = 0,72). Au fil du temps, la
proportion d’individus ayant présenté une diminution ou une augmentation du score
au test SPPB était similaire dans les deux groupes; et aucun changement
significatif dans le niveau d’activité physique ou la qualité de vie relative à
l’état de santé n’avait été observé entre les groupes.Les résultats sont limités 
par le modèle quasi expérimental de l’étude et la faible participation au suivi
sur un an.Cette étude pragmatique démontre que le fait de consulter pour un
programme d’entraînement n’a que peu d’effet sur le score obtenu au test SPPB.
Cette observation suggère qu’une seule séance de consultation en vue d’adopter un
programme d’entraînement n’est pas suffisante pour améliorer la condition
physique des patients atteints d’IRC.
DOI: 10.1177/2054358117753615 
PMCID: PMC5821295
PMID: 29487746 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.


84. Ann R Coll Surg Engl. 2018 Apr;100(4):316-321. doi: 10.1308/rcsann.2018.0014.
Epub 2018 Feb 27.

Early outcomes of patients transferred with ruptured suprarenal aneurysm or
dissection.

Rudarakanchana N(1), Hamady M(2)(3), Harris S(2), Afify E(1), Gibbs R(1),
Bicknell CD(1), Jenkins MP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Surgery Unit, Imperial Healthcare NHS Trust , London , UK.
(2)Department of Surgery, Imperial College London , London , UK.
(3)Department of Interventional Radiology, Imperial Healthcare NHS Trust , London
, UK.

Objective Despite centralisation of the provision of vascular care, not all areas
in England and Wales are able to offer emergency treatment for patients with
acute conditions affecting the aorta proximal to the renal arteries. While
cardiothoracic centres have made network arrangements to coordinate care for the 
repair of type A dissections, a similar plan for vascular care is lacking. This
study investigates early outcomes in patients with ruptured suprarenal aortic
aneurysm or dissection (rSRAD) transferred to a specialist centre. Methods
Retrospective observational study over a five-year period (2009-2014) assessing
outcomes of patients with ruptured sRAD diagnosed at their local hospital and
then transferred to a tertiary centre capable of offering such treatment. Results
Fifty-two patients (median age 73 years, 32 male) with rSRAD were transferred and
a further four died during transit. The mean distance of patient transfer was 35 
miles (range 4-211 miles). One patient did not undergo intervention due to
frailty and two died before reaching the operating theatre. A total of 23
patients underwent endovascular repair, 9 hybrid repair and 17 open surgery.
Median follow-up was 12 months (range 1-43 months). Complications included
paraplegia (n = 3), stroke (n = 2), type IA endoleak (n = 4); 30-day and
in-hospital mortality were 16% and 27%. For patients discharged alive from
hospital, one-year survival was 67%. Conclusions Although the number of patients 
with rSRAD is low and those who are transferred alive are a self-selecting group,
this study suggests that transfer of such patients to a specialist vascular
centre is associated with acceptable mortality rates following emergency complex 
aortic repair.

DOI: 10.1308/rcsann.2018.0014 
PMCID: PMC5958857 [Available on 2019-04-01]
PMID: 29484940  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 2018 Feb;143(4):253-261. doi: 10.1055/s-0043-106792. Epub
2018 Feb 22.

[Type 2 Diabetes Diabetes in Older Adults: Example for Patient-Centered Drug
Therapy].

[Article in German]

Müller-Wieland D.

Diabetes in older adults has a high prevalence and is frequently associated with 
comorbidities of the cardiovascular system, dysfunction of cognition as well as
depression and impaired mobility or increased frailty. Furthermore, impaired
renal function, heart failure, risk for hypoglycemia and polypharmacy has to be
considered in the decision about the diabetes treatment strategy. The goal of
blood glucose management is driven by patient relevant issues and patient
self-esteem, quality of life defined by the patient, preservation of physical and
social mobility rather than potential long-term effects on reduction of cardio-
and microvascular events in the future, which is limited by patient-inherent
reduced life expectancy of the aged individual. Therefore, long-term diabetes
medication should avoid hypoglycemia and prevent acute hyperglycemia or
short-term complications on morbidity and clinical course of geriatric syndromes 
associated with regular blood glucose levels above 200 mg/dl (11.1 mmol/l). The
therapy should be safe, easy to handle for the patient and possibly affect
co-morbidities positively. However, there are limited data available about
efficacy, safety and pharmacokinetics of drugs in patients over 75 years of age
or older. Since more than 5 % of the population in Germany is older than 80 years
means that more than 1 million of these individuals suffer from diabetes. It is
time to ask for data in these elderly subpopulations by policy makers in health
care.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0043-106792 
PMID: 29471574  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Der Autor hat in den letzten 3 Jahren Honorare
für Vorträge, Beratung und Advisory Boards der Firmen Amgen, AstraZeneca,
Boehringer Ingelheim, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, OmniaMed und
Sanofi erhalten.


86. Saudi J Kidney Dis Transpl. 2018 Jan-Feb;29(1):63-70. doi:
10.4103/1319-2442.225175.

Assessment of prevalence and clinical outcome of frailty in an elderly
predialysis cohort using simple tools.

Ali H(1), Abdelaziz T(1), Abdelaal F(1), Baharani J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Renal Medicine, Heart of England Teaching Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust, Birmingham, UK.

The relationship between frailty and chronic kidney disease in elderly population
has been recognized; however, studies concentrating on frailty in predialysis
patients are limited. For nephrologists, the recognition of frailty is important 
as it has impact on decisions on the choice of dialysis modality and sometimes on
whether dialysis is indeed in the patients' best interests. Many of the tools for
routine assessment of frailty are not easily applicable to those clinicians not
practicing elderly care medicine. A tool needs to be simple and applicable for
daily routine practice. The aim of this study was to assess the prevalence and
clinical outcome of frailty in an elderly predialysis population using simple
tools. A nonrandomized prospective study was conducted in which, 104 patients
aged 65 years or above with an estimated glomerular filtration rate of 25 mL or
less were included. Data including age, sex, renal function, calcium, albumin,
parathormone, and comorbidities were collected at baseline and at three months
interval for one year. Functional performance was assessed using Karnofsky scale.
The Charlson comorbidity index was used to assess comorbid status of each
patient. Frailty was assessed using a combination of PRISMA questionnaire and
Timed up and Go test. End points were death or start of dialysis at 20-month
follow-up. A frail group (n = 58; males = 32, females = 26) and a nonfrail group 
(n = 46; males = 21, females = 25) were identified. Frailty was prevalent in
53.8% of the selected population. There was no significant difference between
both groups in terms of age, gender, comorbidities, hemoglobin, inflammatory
markers, or calcium hemostasis. Nine patients chose conservative management in
the frail group and six in nonfrail group. Rate of death was significantly higher
in the frail group (death = 14) compared to nonfrail group (death = 3; P = 0.01).
There was no significant difference between both groups in terms of initiation of
dialysis (P = 0.1). Frailty and Charlson comorbidity index were significantly
associated with mortality (P = 0.023 and 0.032, respectively). Survival in frail 
patients who started peritoneal dialysis (PD) was slightly better than those
started on hemodialysis (HD) with hazard ratio = 3.23 (P = 0.23). Our study shows
that the prevalence of frailty and mortality rate is high among elderly
predialysis patients. Frailty and Charlson comorbidity index are independent
predictors of outcome in this population. PD might be a better option of dialysis
modality compared to HD in the frail population.

DOI: 10.4103/1319-2442.225175 
PMID: 29456209 

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.


87. Clinics (Sao Paulo). 2018;73:e116. doi: 10.6061/clinics/2018/e116. Epub 2018 Feb 
15.

The Association of Vitamin D Levels and the Frailty Phenotype Among Non-geriatric
Dialysis Patients: A Cross-sectional Study.

Demircioglu DT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Department, Istanbul University,
Istanbul, Turkey.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to investigate the frequency of frailty and
the association of vitamin D levels and the frailty phenotype among non-geriatric
dialysis patients.
METHOD: Seventy-four stable, chronic hemodialysis patients from the hemodialysis 
unit of the hospital were enrolled in the study. The patients' medical histories 
and laboratory findings were obtained from the medical records of the dialysis
unit. Serum parathyroid hormone and 25-hydroxy vitamin D levels were determined
using chemiluminometric immunoassays. Frailty was defined by Fried et al. as a
phenotype; shrinking, weakness, self-reported exhaustion, decreased activity and 
slowed walking speed were evaluated.
RESULTS: Forty-one (55%) of the patients were males. The patients were divided
into 3 groups according to frailty scores: 39 (53%) patients were frail, 6 (8%)
patients were intermediately frail, and 28 (39%) patients were normal.
Significant differences were found for 25-hydroxy vitamin D and hemoglobin levels
among the groups; however, no differences were observed in body mass index,
comorbidities, sex, marital status, education, disease and dialysis durations, or
parathyroid hormone, creatinine, serum calcium, phosphorus, and potassium levels.
CONCLUSIONS: Weakness and slowness are serious outcomes of both vitamin D
deficiency and frailty, and vitamin D deficiency has been associated with
increased risks of decreased physical activity, falls, fractures and death in
postmenopausal women and older men. Although studies on frailty have focused on
older adults, growing evidence indicates that the frailty phenotype is becoming a
factor associated with poor health outcomes in non-geriatric populations with
chronic disease.

DOI: 10.6061/clinics/2018/e116 
PMCID: PMC5773824
PMID: 29451618  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Diabetologia. 2018 Jul;61(7):1503-1516. doi: 10.1007/s00125-018-4547-9. Epub 2018
Feb 7.

Diabetes in the older patient: heterogeneity requires individualisation of
therapeutic strategies.

Schernthaner G(1), Schernthaner-Reiter MH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine 1, Rudolfstiftung Hospital, Juchgasse 25, 1030, Vienna,
Austria. guntram.schernthaner@meduniwien.ac.at.
(2)Clinical Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal
Medicine III, Medical University of Vienna, Währinger Gürtel, 18-20 1090, Vienna,
Austria. marie.schernthaner-reiter@meduniwien.ac.at.

Owing to the worldwide increase in life expectancy, the high incidence of
diabetes in older individuals and the improved survival of people with diabetes, 
about one-third of all individuals with diabetes are now older than 65 years.
Evidence is accumulating that type 2 diabetes is associated with cognitive
impairment, dementia and frailty. Older people with diabetes have significantly
more comorbidities, such as myocardial infarction, stroke, peripheral arterial
disease and renal impairment, compared with those without diabetes. However, as a
consequence of the increased use of multifactorial risk factor intervention, a
considerable number of older individuals can now survive for many years without
any vascular complications. Given the heterogeneity of older individuals with
type 2 diabetes, an individualised approach is warranted, which must take into
account the health status, presence or absence of complications, and life
expectancy. In doing so, undertreatment of otherwise healthy older individuals
and overtreatment of those who are frail may be avoided. Specifically,
overtreatment of hyperglycaemia in older patients is potentially harmful; in
particular, insulin and sulfonylureas should be avoided or, if necessary, used
with caution. Instead, glucose-dependent drugs that do not induce hypoglycaemia
are preferable since older patients with diabetes and impaired kidney function
are especially vulnerable to this adverse event.

DOI: 10.1007/s00125-018-4547-9 
PMID: 29417185  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Vascular. 2018 Aug;26(4):425-431. doi: 10.1177/1708538118756690. Epub 2018 Feb 5.

Peripheral artery disease is associated with frailty in chronic hemodialysis
patients.

Okuyama M(1), Takeuchi H(2)(3), Uchida HA(4), Kakio Y(2), Okuyama Y(2),
Umebayashi R(2), Wada K(5), Sugiyama H(6), Sugimoto K(7), Rakugi H(7), Kasahara
S(1), Wada J(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Okayama University Hospital, Okayama, 
Japan.
(2)2 Department of Nephrology, Rheumatology, Endocrinology and Metabolism,
Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Okayama, Japan.
(3)3 Department of Internal Medicine, Innoshima General Hospital, Hiroshima,
Japan.
(4)4 Department of Chronic Kidney Disease and Cardiovascular Disease, Okayama
University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Okayama, Japan.
(5)5 Division of Nephrology and Dialysis, Department of Internal Medicine, Nippon
Kokan Fukuyama Hospital, Hiroshima, Japan.
(6)6 Department of Human Resource Development of Dialysis Therapy for Kidney
Disease, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, Japan.
(7)7 Department of Geriatric and General Medicine, Osaka University Graduate
School of Medicine, Osaka, Japan.

Objectives The clinical condition of frailty is a common problem in the elderly
population. However, the relationship between peripheral artery disease and
frailty in hemodialysis patients remains unknown. The aim of this study was to
identify the relationships between peripheral artery disease and frailty in
Japanese chronic hemodialysis patients. Methods A total of 362 chronic
hemodialysis patients who regularly visited six institutions were enrolled. To
evaluate frailty, the modified Fried's frailty phenotype adjusted for Japanese
were used. Peripheral artery disease was defined as ankle-brachial index <0.9.
Results Of 362 patients, 62 patients (17.1%) were categorized as peripheral
artery disease group and 300 patients (82.9%) as Non-peripheral artery disease
group. The prevalence of frailty in the peripheral artery disease group was
significantly higher than in the Non-peripheral artery disease group (34% vs.
18%, P = 0.0103). Non-shunt side grip strength was significantly stronger in the 
Non-peripheral artery disease group (23.6 kg vs. 17.0 kg, P < 0.0001). Thigh
circumferences were also significantly larger in the Non-peripheral artery
disease group (41.7 cm vs. 39.7 cm, P = 0.0054). A multivariate logistic
regression analysis demonstrated that the factors independently associated with
peripheral artery disease were as follows: frailty (odds ratio = 2.06, 95%
confidence interval 1.09-3.89) and myocardial infarction (odds ratio = 3.74, 95% 
confidence interval 2.05-6.83). Conclusions It is concluded that peripheral
artery disease is closely associated with frailty in hemodialysis patients.

DOI: 10.1177/1708538118756690 
PMID: 29402196  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


90. BMC Nephrol. 2018 Jan 12;19(1):8. doi: 10.1186/s12882-017-0806-0.

Engaging clinicians and patients to assess and improve frailty measurement in
adults with end stage renal disease.

Van Pilsum Rasmussen S(1), Konel J(1), Warsame F(2), Ying H(1), Buta B(3), Haugen
C(1), King E(1), DiBrito S(1), Varadhan R(4), Rodríguez-Mañas L(5), Walston
JD(2), Segev DL(6)(7), McAdams-DeMarco MA(8)(9)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
MD, USA.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins School of Public Health, Baltimore, 
MD, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(4)Department of Oncology, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Baltimore, 
MD, USA.
(5)Hospital Universitario de Getafe, Madrid, Spain.
(6)Department of Surgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
MD, USA. dorry@jhmi.edu.
(7)Hospital Universitario de Getafe, Madrid, Spain. dorry@jhmi.edu.
(8)Department of Surgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
MD, USA. mara@jhu.edu.
(9)Hospital Universitario de Getafe, Madrid, Spain. mara@jhu.edu.
(10)Department of Epidemiology, 615 N. Wolfe St, W6033, Baltimore, MD, 21205,
USA. mara@jhu.edu.

BACKGROUND: The Fried frailty phenotype, a measure of physiologic reserve defined
by 5 components (exhaustion, unintentional weight loss, low physical activity,
slow walking speed, and poor grip strength), is associated with poor outcomes
among ESRD patients. However, these 5 components may not fully capture
physiologic reserve in this population. We aimed to ascertain opinions of ESRD
clinicians and patients about the usefulness of the Fried frailty phenotype and
interventions to improve frailty in ESRD patients, and to identify novel
components to further characterize frailty in ESRD.
METHODS: Clinicians who treat adults with ESRD completed a 2-round Delphi study
(n = 41 and n = 36, respectively; response rate = 87%). ESRD patients completed a
survey at transplant evaluation (n = 460; response rate = 81%). We compared
clinician and patient opinions on the constituent components of frailty.
RESULTS: Clinicians were more likely than patients to say that ESRD makes
patients frail (97.6% vs. 60.2%). There was consensus among clinicians that
exhaustion, low physical activity, slow walking speed, and poor grip strength
characterize frailty in ESRD patients; however, 29% of clinicians thought weight 
loss was not relevant. Patients were less likely than clinicians to say that the 
5 Fried frailty components were relevant. Clinicians identified 10 new
ESRD-specific potential components including falls (64%), physical decline (61%),
and cognitive impairment (39%). Clinicians (83%) and patients (80%) agreed that
intradialytic foot-peddlers might make ESRD patients less frail.
CONCLUSIONS: There was consensus among clinicians and moderate consensus among
patients that frailty is more common in ESRD. Weight loss was not seen as
relevant, but new components were identified. These findings are first steps in
refining the frailty phenotype and identifying interventions to improve
physiologic reserve specific to ESRD patients.

DOI: 10.1186/s12882-017-0806-0 
PMCID: PMC5766981
PMID: 29329515  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Acta Diabetol. 2018 Apr;55(4):323-330. doi: 10.1007/s00592-017-1094-7. Epub 2018 
Jan 11.

Levels of serum uric acid at admission for hypoglycaemia predict 1-year
mortality.

Bonaventura A(1), Gallo F(2), Carbone F(3), Liberale L(3)(4), Maggi D(2), Sacchi 
G(5), Dallegri F(3)(6), Montecucco F(3)(6)(7), Cordera R(2).

Author information: 
(1)First Clinic of Internal Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, University
of Genoa, 6 Viale Benedetto XV, 16132, Genoa, Italy. aldobon85@gmail.com.
(2)Diabetology Unit, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Genoa, 6
Viale Benedetto XV, 16132, Genoa, Italy.
(3)First Clinic of Internal Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, University
of Genoa, 6 Viale Benedetto XV, 16132, Genoa, Italy.
(4)Center for Molecular Cardiology, University of Zürich, 12 Wagistrasse, 8952,
Schlieren, Switzerland.
(5)Emergency Department, Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, 10 Largo Benzi, 16132,
Genoa, Italy.
(6)Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, 10 Largo Benzi, 16132, Genoa, Italy.
(7)Centre of Excellence for Biomedical Research (CEBR), University of Genoa, 9
Viale Benedetto XV, 16132, Genoa, Italy.

AIMS: Hypoglycaemia represents a critical burden with clinical and social
consequences in the management of diabetes. Serum uric acid (SUA) has been
associated with cardiovascular diseases (CVD), but no conclusive findings are
available nowadays in patients suffering from hypoglycaemia. We investigated
whether SUA levels at the time of hypoglycaemia could predict all-cause mortality
after 1-year follow-up.
METHODS: In total, 219 patients admitted to the Emergency Department (ED) of
Ospedale Policlinico S. Martino of Genoa (Italy) have been enrolled between
January 2011 and December 2014. The primary endpoint of the study consisted in
determining whether SUA levels at the time of ED admission could predict the
occurrence of death after 1 year.
RESULTS: The majority of patients were diabetic, especially type 2. CVD and
chronic kidney disease were prevalent comorbidities. By a cut-off value obtained 
by the receiver operating characteristic curve analysis, a Kaplan-Meier analysis 
demonstrated that patients with SUA levels > 5.43 mg/dL were more prone to death 
after 1 year compared to those with lower SUA levels. The risk of death increased
with high SUA levels both in the univariate and the multivariate models including
estimated glomerular filtration rate, C-reactive protein, type of diabetes, and
age-adjusted Charlson comorbidity index.
CONCLUSIONS: SUA could be useful as a predictor of 1-year mortality in
hypoglycaemic patients, irrespective of severe comorbidities notably increasing
the risk of death in these frail patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s00592-017-1094-7 
PMID: 29327150  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Clin Med Res. 2018 Feb;10(2):82-87. doi: 10.14740/jocmr3203w. Epub 2017 Dec 30.

Frailty Testing Pilot Study: Pros and Pitfalls.

Adlam T(1), Ulrich E(1), Kent M(2), Malinzak L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI, USA.
(2)Department of Transplant, Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, MI, USA.

Background: Frailty can be defined as an inflammatory state with a loss of
physiologic reserve in multiple systems that manifests as a decreased ability to 
respond to stressors that ultimately leads to an increased risk of adverse
outcomes. The aim of this study was to determine the ease of frailty testing in a
pre-kidney transplant clinic and the resources required to do so. A secondary
goal was to better understand the utility of frailty testing when evaluating
potential kidney transplant recipients.
Methods: Frailty testing was conducted at a pre-kidney transplant clinic in three
phases using Fried's frailty phenotype (shrinking, exhaustion, low physical
activity, slowness, and grip strength).
Results: A total of 132 frailty tests were completed on 128 patients. Frail
patients had significantly higher rates of shrinking (26% vs. 8.5%, P < 0.05),
exhaustion (82.6% vs. 27.6%, P < 0.05), low physical activity (78.2% vs. 19.0%, P
< 0.05), slow walking (60.8% vs. 15.2%, P < 0.05), and grip strength (73.9% vs.
25.7%, P < 0.05). When comparing the listing of frail and non-frail patients for 
transplant, a significantly lower proportion of frail patients were listed
compared to non-frail patients (30.4% vs. 57.6%, P < 0.05). Frailty testing was
most complete when an examiner dedicated to frailty testing performed the
testing.
Conclusions: Frailty testing is feasible to complete in a pre-transplant clinic
with an appropriate investment in personnel and resources.

DOI: 10.14740/jocmr3203w 
PMCID: PMC5755647
PMID: 29317953 


93. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens. 2018 Mar;27(2):113-120. doi:
10.1097/MNH.0000000000000393.

Chronic kidney disease and acquired mitochondrial myopathy.

Rao M(1), Jaber BL(2), Balakrishnan VS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Tufts Medical Center.
(2)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, St. Elizabeth's Medical
Center, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Sarcopenia and muscle weakness contribute to fragility and
limit exercise tolerance among patients with CKD. This review focuses on the role
of reduction in mitochondrial mass and function in the myopathy associated with
CKD, causes for these muscle mitochondrial abnormalities, and potential
therapeutic interventions that may improve mitochondrial biogenesis and function 
as well as skeletal muscle function and performance in patients with CKD.
RECENT FINDINGS: Multiple abnormalities of mitochondrial structure, function, and
composition have been shown in both experimental models and patients with CKD. A 
significant reduction in mitochondrial respiratory function and an increase in
mitochondrial complex 1 enzyme activity has been demonstrated in the muscle
tissue of male Sprague-Dawley rats following 5/6 nephrectomy. These changes were 
associated with a substantial reduction in skeletal muscle mitochondrial mass. In
patients with CKD, in-vivo magnetic resonance and optical spectroscopy show
significantly elevated resting skeletal muscle oxygen consumption and lower mean 
mitochondrial coupling ratio indicating disrupted muscle mitochondrial metabolism
and uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation. Skeletal muscle biopsies from
patients with advanced CKD show lower mitochondrial volume density and
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy number than controls.
SUMMARY: Advanced CKD is associated with decreased exercise capacity, skeletal
muscle weakness, and muscle atrophy. Impaired mitochondrial respiratory function,
reduced muscle mitochondrial mass, and decreased energy production in skeletal
muscle play a critical role in this 'acquired mitochondrial myopathy' of CKD. It 
is reasonable, therefore, to develop therapeutic interventions that enhance
mitochondrial biogenesis and function as well as skeletal muscle function and
performance in patients with CKD.

DOI: 10.1097/MNH.0000000000000393 
PMID: 29266014  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Geriatr Oncol. 2018 May;9(3):265-274. doi: 10.1016/j.jgo.2017.11.011. Epub 2017
Dec 15.

Current systemic therapies for metastatic renal cell carcinoma in older adults: A
comprehensive review.

Maia MC(1), Adashek J(2), Bergerot P(1), Almeida L(1), Dos Santos SF(3), Pal
SK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology & Experimental Therapeutics, City of Hope
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Duarte, CA, United States.
(2)College of Osteopathic Medicine of the Pacific, Western University of Health
Sciences, Pomona, CA, United States.
(3)Department of Geriatrics, Hospital das Clinicas de Faculdade de Medicine de
Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology & Experimental Therapeutics, City of Hope
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Duarte, CA, United States. Electronic address:
spal@coh.org.

Physiological changes that occur during the aging process may impact drug
metabolism and availability, consequently affecting treatment efficacy and
tolerability. Despite being a disease of older adults, there is little data to
guide treatment decisions for older patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma
(mRCC). The recent approval of many new agents for this disease poses a clinical 
challenge: how to best utilize these drugs in a population (older adults) who has
been generally under-represented in clinical studies. Additionally, the presence 
of comorbid conditions, polypharmacy, frailty, and lack of social support place
this group of patients in a very unique situation. In order to avoid
under-treatment, international societies' guidelines recommend routine use of
geriatric tools to assess patients' suitability for systemic treatments. Here we 
provide a thorough review of age-related metabolic differences, safety and
efficacy data for each drug approved for mRCC, and cover specific considerations 
for the management of older adults with this disease.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jgo.2017.11.011 
PMID: 29249644 


95. Nutr Health. 2017 Dec;23(4):251-260. doi: 10.1177/0260106017737465.

Different protein and derivatives supplementation strategies combined with
resistance training in pre-frail and frail elderly: Rationale and protocol for
the "Pro-Elderly" Study.

Fernandes AL(1), Hayashi AP(1)(2), Jambassi-Filho JC(1), de Capitani MD(1), de
Santana DA(1)(2), Gualano B(1)(2), Roschel H(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 Applied Physiology & Nutrition Research Group, School of Physical Education 
and Sport, University of Sao Paulo - Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(2)2 Rheumatology Division, Faculty of Medicine, University of Sao Paulo - Sao
Paulo, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Frailty is a multifactorial geriatric syndrome characterized by
progressive decline in health and associated with decreased muscle mass,
strength, and functional capacity. Resistance training (RT) combined with protein
or amino acids supplementation has been shown to be promising for mitigating
age-related impairments.
AIM: To investigate the chronic effects of different strategies of protein and
derivatives supplementation in association with RT on selected health-related
parameters in pre-frail and frail elderly.
METHODS: This is a series of double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled,
parallel-group clinical trials. Volunteers will be divided into nine groups,
comprising four different sub-studies evaluating the effects of: isolated leucine
supplementation (study 1); protein source (whey vs. soy - study 2); combination
of whey protein and creatine (study 3); and sexual dimorphism on the response to 
protein intake and RT (males vs. females - study 4). Muscle cross-sectional area,
fiber cross-sectional area, body composition, lower-limb maximal dynamic and
isometric strength, functionality, lipid profile, biochemical parameters, renal
function, quality of life, and nutritional status will be assessed before and
after a 16-week intervention period. Data will be tested for normality and a
mixed-model for repeated measures will be conducted to assess within- and
between-group effects of the intervention on the dependent variables. Confidence 
intervals (95%), effect sizes, and relative changes will also be determined, with
significance set at p < 0.05.

DOI: 10.1177/0260106017737465 
PMID: 29214924  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Braz J Cardiovasc Surg. 2017 Sep-Oct;32(5):428-434. doi:
10.21470/1678-9741-2017-0196.

Off-pump versus On-pump Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting in Frail Patients: Study 
Protocol for the FRAGILE Multicenter Randomized Controlled Trial.

Mejía OAV(1), Sá MPBO(1)(2), Deininger MO(3), Dallan LRP(1), Segalote RC(4),
Oliveira MAP(5), Atik FA(6), Santos MAD(7), Silva PGMBE(8), Milani RM(9), Hueb
AC(1)(10), Monteiro R(1), Lima RC(11)(2), Lisboa LAF(1), Dallan LAO(1), Puskas
J(12), Jatene FB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto do Coração do Hospital das Clínicas da Faculdade de Medicina da
Universidade de São Paulo (InCor-HCFMUSP), São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(2)Universidade de Pernambuco (UPE), Recife, PE, Brazil.
(3)Hospital Alberto Urquiza Wanderley - Unimed, João Pessoa, PB, Brazil.
(4)Instituto Nacional de Cardiologia (INC), Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.
(5)Hospital Beneficência Portuguesa de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(6)Instituto de Cardiologia do Distrito Federal, Brasília, DF, Brazil.
(7)Instituto Dante Pazzanese de Cardiologia, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(8)Total Cor Hospital - São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(9)Pontificia Universidade Católica do Paraná (PUCPR), Curitiba, PR, Brazil.
(10)Hospital das Clinicas Samuel Libânio, Pouso Alegre, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(11)Division of Cardiovascular Surgery, Pronto-Socorro Cardiológico de Pernambuco
(PROCAPE), Recife, PE, Brazil.
(12)Mount Sinai Heart at Mount Sinai Saint Luke's New York, NY, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Advances in modern medicine have led to people living longer and
healthier lives. Frailty is an emerging concept in medicine yet to be explored as
a risk factor in cardiac surgery. When it comes to CABG surgery, randomized
controlled clinical trials have primarily focused on low-risk (ROOBY, CORONARY), 
elevated-risk (GOPCABE) or high-risk patients (BBS), but not on frail patients.
Therefore, we believe that off-pump CABG could be an important technique in
patients with limited functional capacity to respond to surgical stress. In this 
study, the authors introduce the new national, multicenter, randomized,
controlled trial "FRAGILE", to be developed in the main cardiac surgery centers
of Brazil, to clarify the potential benefit of off-pump CABG in frail patients.
METHODS: FRAGILE is a two-arm, parallel-group, multicentre, individually
randomized (1:1) controlled trial which will enroll 630 patients with blinded
outcome assessment (at 30 days, 6 months, 1 year, 2 years and 3 years), which
aims to compare adverse cardiac and cerebrovascular events after off-pump versus 
on-pump CABG in pre-frail and frail patients. Primary outcomes will be all-cause 
mortality, acute myocardial infarction, cardiac arrest with successful
resuscitation, low cardiac output syndrome/cardiogenic shock, stroke, and
coronary reintervention. Secondary outcomes will be major adverse cardiac and
cerebrovascular events, operative time, mechanical ventilation time, hyperdynamic
shock, new onset of atrial fibrillation, renal replacement therapy, reoperation
for bleeding, pneumonia, length of stay in intensive care unit, length of stay in
hospital, number of units of blood transfused, graft patency, rate of complete
revascularization, neurobehavioral outcomes after cardiac surgery, quality of
life after cardiac surgery and costs.
DISCUSSION: FRAGILE trial will determine whether off-pump CABG is superior to
conventional on-pump CABG in the surgical treatment of pre-frail and frail
patients.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov, ID: NCT02338947. Registered on August
29th 2014; last updated on March 21st 2016.

DOI: 10.21470/1678-9741-2017-0196 
PMCID: PMC5701109
PMID: 29211225  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


97. BMC Geriatr. 2017 Dec 2;17(1):277. doi: 10.1186/s12877-017-0673-3.

Frail phenotype is associated with distinct quantitative electroencephalographic 
findings among end-stage renal disease patients: an observational study.

Chao CT(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Lai HJ(2)(6), Tsai HB(4), Yang SY(7), Huang JW(4); COhort
of GEriatric Nephrology in NTUH (COGENT) study group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital Bei-Hu branch,
Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital Jin-Shan branch,
New Taipei City, Taiwan.
(3)Graduate Institute of Toxicology, School of Medicine, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, NO.7,
Chung-Shan South Road, Zhong-Zheng district, Taipei, 100, Taiwan.
(5)Community and Geriatric Medicine Research Center, National Taiwan University
Hospital BeiHu branch, Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Neurology, National Taiwan University Hospital and College of
Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, NO.7,
Chung-Shan South Road, Zhong-Zheng district, Taipei, 100, Taiwan.
yangshaoyo@yahoo.com.tw.

BACKGROUND: Frailty is prevalent among patients with end-stage renal disease
(ESRD) and is associated with an increased risk of cognitive impairment. However,
apart from its influence on cognition, it is currently unknown whether frailty
affects subtler cerebral function in patients with ESRD.
METHODS: Patients with ESRD were prospectively enrolled, with clinical features
and laboratory data recorded. The severity of frailty among these patients with
ESRD was ascertained using the previously validated simple FRAIL scale, and was
categorized as none-to-mild and moderate-to-severe frailty. All participants
underwent quantitative electroencephalography (EEG), with band powers documented 
following the generation of the delta to alpha ratio (DAR) and delta/theta to
alpha/beta ratio (DTABR). EEG results were then compared between groups of
different levels of frailty.
RESULTS: In this cohort, (mean age: 68.9 ± 10.4 years, 37% male, 3.4 ± 3 years of
dialysis), 20, 60, 40, 17, and 6% patients exhibited positivity in the fatigue,
resistance, ambulation, illness, and loss-of-body-weight domains, respectively,
with 45.7% being none to mildly frail and 54.3% being moderately to severely
frail. Those with mild frailty had a significantly higher delta power compared to
those with more severe frailty, involving all topographic sites. Patients with
ESRD and severe frailty had significantly lower global, left frontal, left
temporo-occipital, and right temporo-occipital DAR and DTABR, except in the right
frontal area, and tended to have central accentuation of alpha, beta, and theta
power, and more homogeneous DTABR and DAR distribution compared to the findings
in those with mild frailty.
CONCLUSIONS: Frailty in patients with ESRD can have subtler neurophysiological
influences, presenting as altered EEG findings, which warrant our attention.

DOI: 10.1186/s12877-017-0673-3 
PMCID: PMC5712101
PMID: 29197341  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Int J Clin Pharm. 2018 Feb;40(1):109-118. doi: 10.1007/s11096-017-0571-y. Epub
2017 Nov 29.

Drug-related problems identified during geriatric medication review in the
community pharmacy.

Rhalimi M(1)(2), Rauss A(3), Housieaux E(4).

Author information: 
(1)Centre Hospitalier Bertinot Juël, Service Pharmacie, 34 bis rue Pierre BUDIN, 
60240, Chaumont en Vexin, France. m.rhalimi@ch-chaumontenvexin.fr.
(2)INSERM U1088, Université de Picardie Jules Verne, Amiens, France.
m.rhalimi@ch-chaumontenvexin.fr.
(3)ARCOSA, 94450, Limeil-Brévannes, Val de Marne, France.
(4)Faculté de Pharmacie, 1 rue des Louvels, 80037, Amiens Cedex 1, France.

Background In line with the changing role of community pharmacists, we describe
here a standardised procedure for detecting DRPs in elderly patients for use in
community pharmacies. Objectives The primary aim was to describe the number and
type of DRPs identified by community pharmacists in elderly patients. Secondary
aims were to determine the number and type of associated pharmacist interventions
(PIs) that were transmitted to the prescribers, and to identify risk factors
associated with the occurrence of a PI. Setting Community pharmacies. Methods In 
this prospective, multicentre study, pharmacists received patients aged 65 and
over. During a 30-min interview with patients who agreed to participate, patient 
characteristics were recorded such as age, weight, height, frailty (using the
Short Emergency Geriatric Assessment grid), estimated renal function and
compliance with treatment assessed by the Girerd scale. Main outcome measure DRPs
characteristics. Results A total of 892 patients agreed to participate in 55
pharmacies. Among them 334 DRPs were identified and were associated with 259 PIs.
Eighty-nine PIs of 259 were sent to the prescribing physicians; 70 (78%) were
implemented by the general practitioner. Factors associated with the occurrence
of a DRP are compliance problems [odds ratio (OR) = 1.8, 95% confidence interval 
(CI) (1.26-2.58)], frailty [OR = 1.3, 95% CI (1.01-1.66)], number of prescribed
drugs per day [OR = 1.46, 95% CI (1.02-2.07)] and GFR < 60 mL/min [OR = 1.49, 95%
CI (1.01-2.2)]. Conclusion This is the first standardised pharmaceutical
assessment dedicated to the elderly carried out by community pharmacists in
France. If implemented, it could help to find drug-related problems, identify
frail elderly patients and ultimately decrease their exposure to iatrogenic
medication errors.

DOI: 10.1007/s11096-017-0571-y 
PMID: 29188412  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


99. BMC Palliat Care. 2017 Nov 22;16(1):56. doi: 10.1186/s12904-017-0236-6.

Behaviors in Advance Care Planning and ACtions Survey (BACPACS): development and 
validation part 1.

Kassam A(1), Douglas ML(2), Simon J(3), Cunningham S(4), Fassbender K(5), Shaw
M(6), Davison SN(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Community Health Sciences, Cumming School of Medicine,
University of Calgary, 3330 Hospital Drive NW, Calgary, AB, T2N 4N1, Canada.
kassama@ucalgary.ca.
(2)Advance Care Planning CRIO Program, Division of Oncology, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
(3)Department of Oncology, Community Health Sciences and Medicine, Cumming School
of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.
(4)Alberta Innovates, Performance Management and Evaluation, Edmonton, AB,
Canada.
(5)Covenant Health Palliative Institute, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
(6)Community Health Sciences, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.
(7)Department of Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Although advance care planning (ACP) is fairly well understood,
significant barriers to patient participation remain. As a result, tools to
assess patient behaviour are required. The objective of this study was to improve
the measurement of patient engagement in ACP by detecting existing survey design 
issues and establishing content and response process validity for a new survey
entitled Behaviours in Advance Care Planning and ACtions Survey (BACPACS).
METHODS: We based our new tool on that of an existing ACP engagement survey.
Initial item reduction was carried out using behavior change theories by content 
and design experts to help reduce response burden and clarify questions.
Thirty-two patients with chronic diseases (cancer, heart failure or renal
failure) were recruited for the think aloud cognitive interviewing with the new, 
shortened survey evaluating patient engagement with ACP. Of these, n = 27 had
data eligible for analysis (n = 8 in round 1 and n = 19 in rounds 2 and 3).
Interviews were audio-recorded and analyzed using the constant comparison method.
Three reviewers independently listened to the interviews, summarized findings and
discussed discrepancies until consensus was achieved.
RESULTS: Item reduction from key content expert review and conversation analysis 
helped decrease number of items from 116 in the original ACP Engagement Survey to
24-38 in the new BACPACS depending on branching of responses. For the think aloud
study, three rounds of interviews were needed until saturation for patient
clarity was achieved. The understanding of ACP as a construct, survey response
options, instructions and terminology pertaining to patient engagement in ACP
warranted further clarification.
CONCLUSIONS: Conversation analysis, content expert review and think aloud
cognitive interviewing were useful in refining the new survey instrument entitled
BACPACS. We found evidence for both content and response process validity for
this new tool.

DOI: 10.1186/s12904-017-0236-6 
PMCID: PMC5700663
PMID: 29166904  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Cachexia Sarcopenia Muscle. 2018 Feb;9(1):41-52. doi: 10.1002/jcsm.12260. Epub 
2017 Nov 21.

Vitamin B12 deficiency and impaired expression of amnionless during aging.

Pannérec A(1), Migliavacca E(1), De Castro A(2), Michaud J(1), Karaz S(1), Goulet
L(1), Rezzi S(1), Ng TP(3)(4), Bosco N(2), Larbi A(5), Feige JN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences, EPFL Innovation Park, Building H, 1015,
Lausanne, Switzerland.
(2)Nestlé Research Centre, Singapore.
(3)Gerontology Research Programme, Department of Psychological Medicine, Young
Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore.
(4)Geriatric Education and Research Institute, Ministry of Health, Singapore.
(5)Singapore Immunology Network, Biopolis, Agency for Science, Technology and
Research, Singapore.

BACKGROUND: Physical frailty and loss of mobility in elderly individuals lead to 
reduced independence, quality of life, and increased mortality. Vitamin B12
deficiency has been linked to several age-related chronic diseases, including in 
the musculo-skeletal system, where vitamin B12 deficiency is generally believed
to be linked to poor nutritional intake. In the present study, we asked whether
aging and frailty associate with altered vitamin B12 homeostasis in humans and
investigated the underlying molecular mechanisms using preclinical models.
METHODS: We analysed a subset of the Singapore Longitudinal Aging Study and
stratified 238 participants based on age and Fried frailty criteria. Levels of
methyl-malonic acid (MMA), a marker for vitamin B12 deficiency, and amnionless,
the vitamin B12 co-receptor that anchors the vitamin B12 transport complex to the
membrane of epithelial cells, were measured in plasma. In addition, vitamin B12
levels and the molecular mechanisms of vitamin B12 uptake and excretion were
analysed in ileum, kidney, liver, and blood using a rat model of natural aging
where nutritional intake is fully controlled.
RESULTS: We demonstrate that aging and frailty are associated with a higher
prevalence of functional vitamin B12 deficiency that can be detected by increased
levels of MMA in blood (ρ = 0.25; P = 0.00013). The decline in circulating
vitamin B12 levels is recapitulated in a rat model of natural aging where food
composition and intake are stable. At the molecular level, these perturbations
involve altered expression of amnionless in the ileum and kidney. Interestingly, 
we demonstrate that amnionless can be detected in serum where its levels increase
during aging in both rodents and human (P = 3.3e-07 and 9.2e-07, respectively).
Blood amnionless levels negatively correlate with vitamin B12 in rats (r2
 = 0.305; P = 0.0042) and positively correlate with the vitamin B12 deficiency
marker MMA in humans (ρ = 0.22; P = 0.00068).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that aging and frailty cause intrinsic
vitamin B12 deficiencies, which can occur independently of nutritional intake.
Mechanistically, vitamin B12 deficiency involves the physio-pathological decline 
of both the intestinal uptake and the renal reabsorption system for vitamin B12. 
Finally, amnionless is a novel biomarker which can detect perturbed vitamin B12
bioavailability during aging and physical frailty.

© 2017 The Authors. Journal of Cachexia, Sarcopenia and Muscle published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of the Society on Sarcopenia, Cachexia and Wasting
Disorders.

DOI: 10.1002/jcsm.12260 
PMCID: PMC5803611
PMID: 29159972  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Ren Nutr. 2018 Mar;28(2):101-109. doi: 10.1053/j.jrn.2017.07.007. Epub 2017 Nov
20.

Frailty and the Quality of Life in Hemodialysis Patients: The Importance of Waist
Circumference.

Noori N(1), Sharma Parpia A(1), Lakhani R(2), Janes S(1), Goldstein MB(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, St. Michael's Hospital,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)School of Medicine, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin, Ireland.
(3)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, St. Michael's Hospital,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Electronic address: goldsteinma@smh.ca.

OBJECTIVE: Frailty among the end-stage renal disease (ESRD) population is highly 
prevalent and has been associated with mortality. Little is known about the
relation of different aspects of body composition, a modifiable risk factor, with
the risk of frailty in ESRD population.
DESIGN AND METHODS: One hundred and fifty-one patients including 85 men and 66
women, aged ≥18 years with ESRD who had been receiving conventional maintenance
hemodialysis (HD) for at least 3 months were included. Body fat and muscle mass
from both bioimpedance spectroscopy and skin-fold thickness and waist
circumference as a surrogate of abdominal obesity were measured. Frailty was
defined based on Fried's criteria. Health-related quality of life was collected
using the RAND version of the Kidney Disease Quality of Life (KDQOL-36) Survey.
RESULTS: We performed single and multiple predictor logistic regression analyses 
to determine factors associated with frailty. After adjustment for age, sex, and 
comorbidities, fat mass (both by bioimpedance spectroscopy and anthropometry) and
waist circumference, but not muscle mass remained the main predictors of frailty.
The odds ratio of frailty in the third tertile compared with the first was 4.97
(1.70-14.55) and 3.84 (1.39-10.61) for fat mass and waist circumference,
respectively (P for trends for both <.05). The scores of physical health and
kidney disease effect component of quality of life were lower in frail compared
with nonfrail patients (40.7 ± 9.2 vs. 33.7 ± 10.2, P < .01 and 66.8 ± 22.4 vs.
51.6 ± 25.7, P < .05 for physical health and effects of disease, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Frailty, which is associated with poor outcomes in chronic HD
patients, is common and predicted by fat mass and waist circumference but not by 
body mass index and muscle mass. Interventions to modify abdominal obesity,
reflected by waist circumference, could potentially lower the incidence of
frailty and hence improve the quality of life in the HD population.

Copyright © 2017 National Kidney Foundation, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.jrn.2017.07.007 
PMID: 29158063 


102. Healthcare (Basel). 2017 Oct 28;5(4). pii: E81. doi: 10.3390/healthcare5040081.

Senescent Nephropathy: The New Renal Syndrome.

Aiello F(1), Dueñas EP(2)(3), Musso CG(4).

Author information: 
(1)Human Physiology Department, Instituto Universitario del Hospital Italiano de 
Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires C1199ABB, Argentina.
instituto.universitario@hospitalitaliano.org.ar.
(2)Family Physician Department, Universidad del Valle, Valle del Cauca 760001,
Colombia. eliana.711410002@ucaldas.edu.co.
(3)Geriatric Internal Medicine Department, Universidad de Caldas, Manizales
170002, Colombia. eliana.711410002@ucaldas.edu.co.
(4)Human Physiology Department, Instituto Universitario del Hospital Italiano de 
Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires C1199ABB, Argentina.
carlos.musso@hospitalitaliano.org.ar.

Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is a condition characterized by progressive and
irreversible deterioration of renal function due to the reduction of nephron mass
for a period of at least three months. The prevalence of CKD is roughly 10% in
the general population but increases with age, affecting more than one-third of
people older than 65. Frailty is a condition usually found in elderly people,
characterized by weakness, motility, and balance issues, with a declined ability 
to resist stressors leading to increased risks of adverse health outcomes
including falls, fracture, hospitalization, institutionalization, disability,
dependence, dementia, poor quality of life, and death. There is interdependence
between CKD and normal ageing whereby CKD makes ageing more accelerated and
pronounced (senescence), whereas senescence accelerates chronic nephropathy's
progression. Frailty status catalyzes this spiral, with renal and systemic
consequences, phenomenon which can be named senescent nephropathy. In conclusion,
senescent nephropathy is a new renal syndrome that should be taken into account, 
and we must try to handle its appearance and progression not only by applying
nephron prevention measurements but also by diagnosis and treating frailty in the
CKD population.

DOI: 10.3390/healthcare5040081 
PMCID: PMC5746715
PMID: 29143769 

Conflict of interest statement: All the authors declare that they have no
conflict of interest.


103. Am J Kidney Dis. 2018 Feb;71(2):182-190. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2017.08.014. Epub
2017 Nov 8.

Association of Citizenship Status With Kidney Transplantation in Medicaid
Patients.

Shen JI(1), Hercz D(2), Barba LM(3), Wilhalme H(2), Lum EL(4), Huang E(4), Reddy 
U(5), Salas L(6), Vangala S(2), Norris KC(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Los Angeles Biomedical Research
Institute at Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance, CA; Department of Medicine,
David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA. Electronic address:
jshen@labiomed.org.
(2)Department of Medicine Statistics Core, David Geffen School of Medicine at
UCLA, Los Angeles, CA.
(3)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Los Angeles Biomedical Research
Institute at Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance, CA; Department of Medicine,
David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA.
(4)Division of Nephrology, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, 
CA.
(5)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, University of California Irvine,
Orange, CA.
(6)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Los Angeles Biomedical Research
Institute at Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance, CA.
(7)Division of General Internal Medicine and Health Services Research, David
Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA.

BACKGROUND: Although individuals classified as nonresident aliens, including
undocumented immigrants, are entitled to receive emergency dialysis in the United
States regardless of their ability to pay, most states do not provide them with
subsidized care for maintenance dialysis or kidney transplantation. We explored
whether nonresident aliens have similar outcomes to US citizens after receiving
kidney transplants covered by Medicaid, a joint federal and state health
insurance program.
STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective observational cohort study.
SETTING & PARTICIPANTS: All adult Medicaid patients in the US Renal Data System
who received their first kidney transplant from 1990 to 2011.
PREDICTOR: Citizenship status, categorized as US citizen, nonresident alien, or
permanent resident.
OUTCOME: All-cause transplant loss.
MEASUREMENTS: HRs and 95% CIs estimated by applying Cox proportional hazards
frailty models with transplantation center as a random effect.
RESULTS: Of 10,495 patients, 8,660 (82%) were US citizens, 1,489 (14%) were
permanent residents, and 346 (3%) were nonresident aliens, whom we assumed were
undocumented immigrants. Nonresident aliens were younger, healthier, receiving
dialysis longer, and more likely to have had a living donor. 71% underwent
transplantation in California, and 61% underwent transplantation after 2005.
Nonresident aliens had a lower unadjusted risk for transplant loss compared with 
US citizens (HR, 0.48; 95% CI, 0.35-0.65). Results were attenuated but still
significant when adjusted for demographics, comorbid conditions, dialysis, and
transplant-related factors (HR, 0.67; 95% CI, 0.46-0.94).
LIMITATIONS: Citizenship status was self-reported, possible residual confounding.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggests that the select group of insured nonresident
aliens who undergo transplantation with Medicaid do just as well as US citizens
with Medicaid. Policymakers should consider expanding coverage for kidney
transplantation in nonresident aliens, including undocumented immigrants, given
the associated high-quality outcomes in these patients.

Copyright © 2017 National Kidney Foundation, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2017.08.014 
PMCID: PMC5794566
PMID: 29128413 


104. J Aging Res. 2017;2017:7624139. doi: 10.1155/2017/7624139. Epub 2017 Sep 28.

Frail Patient in Hemodialysis: A New Challenge in Nephrology-Incidence in Our
Area, Barcelonès Nord and Maresme.

Bancu I(1)(2)(3)(4), Graterol F(1)(2)(3)(4), Bonal J(1)(2)(3)(4),
Fernández-Crespo P(5), Garcia J(5), Aguerrevere S(5), Del Castillo D(5), Bonet
J(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Nephrology Service, Hospital Universitari Germans Trias i Pujol, Badalona,
Spain.
(2)Institut d'Investigació en Ciències de la Salut Germans Trias i Pujol (IGTP), 
Can Ruti Campus, Badalona, Spain.
(3)Agència de Gestió d'Ajuts Universitaris i de Recerca- (AGAUR-) REMAR,
Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Red Investigación Renal (REDinREN), Instituto Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(5)Diaverum Renal Services, Madrid, Spain.

Introduction: Labeling a patient as "frail" may be useful in assessing the
prognosis and therapeutic approach.
Objective: The aim of the study is to define a pattern of frailty among our
dialysis population, to analyse the incidence and clinical evolution of these
patients.
Materials and Methods: We analysed a total of 320 patients with stage V chronic
kidney disease (CKD) who were on hemodialysis between September 2014 and
September 2015. To define a patient as frail we used the Fried phenotype model,
and we added a new criteria-dialysis session length longer than 12 hours/week.
Results: 5.6% of the 320 patients were frail. We found statistically significant 
differences regarding body mass index (BMI), hemoglobin (Hgb), and serum albumin,
as well as the ability to perform the basic activities of daily living (p <
0.005), ability to ambulate (p = 0.01) and perform transfers (p < 0.005). We
found statistically significant differences between the two groups in terms of
hospital admissions (p = 0.005) and mortality (p < 0.005).
Conclusion: 5.6% of the study population were frail, with lower BMI, serum
albumin and hemoglobin, lower capacity for basic activities of daily living,
ambulation, and transference, as well as higher morbidity and mortality.

DOI: 10.1155/2017/7624139 
PMCID: PMC5637862
PMID: 29093973 


105. Clin Interv Aging. 2017 Oct 16;12:1725-1729. doi: 10.2147/CIA.S142507.
eCollection 2017.

Association between serum β2-microglobulin levels and frailty in an elderly
Chinese population: results from RuLAS.

Liu ZY(#)(1), Shen YY(#)(2), Ji LJ(3), Jiang XY(4), Wang XF(5), Shi Y(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(2)Department of Nephrology, People's Hospital of Xuyi, Xuyi, Jiangsu, China.
(3)Department of Sport Medicine and Pain Clinic, Center of Sports Rehabilitation,
School of Sport Science, Shanghai University of Sport.
(4)Key Laboratory of Arrhythmias of the Ministry of Education of China, Tongji
University School of Medicine.
(5)Unit of Epidemiology, Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Contemporary
Anthropology, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(6)Department of Emergency, Huai'an Second People's Hospital, The Affiliated
Huai'an Hospital of Xuzhou Medical University, Huai'an, China.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVE: To examine the association between serum β2-microglobulin (B2M) levels
and frailty in an elderly Chinese population.
DESIGN: A population-based cohort study.
SETTING AND PARTICIPANTS: We used data on 1,663 elderly participants (aged 70-84 
years) from the aging arm of the Rugao Longevity and Ageing study, a
population-based observational two-arm cohort study conducted in Rugao, China.
MEASUREMENTS: The serum B2M was measured with chemiluminescence immunoassay by a 
technician in the biochemistry laboratory of the Rugao People's Hospital.
Information on the frailty index and phenotype was collected.
RESULTS: The mean B2M levels and frailty index were 1.8 mg/L and 0.16,
respectively; 188 (11.3%) participants were classified as frail (frailty
phenotype). For a standard deviation increase in B2M, the adjusted odds ratio for
frailty phenotype was 1.20 (95% CI: 1.05, 1.39; P=0.009) and the standardized
coefficient for frailty index was 0.07 (95% CI: 0.02, 0.11; P=0.004). Relative to
the lowest quartile, the highest B2M quartile had a greater risk of prevalent
frailty with adjusted odds ratios of 1.68 (95% CI: 1.04, 2.71; P=0.034) for
frailty phenotype and 1.51 (95% CI: 1.01, 2.27; P=0.044) for frailty index
(≥0.25). In addition, estimated glomerular filtration rate (based on B2M) or
chronic kidney disease (estimated glomerular filtration rate <60 mL/min/1.73 m2) 
was significantly associated with frailty phenotype and index.
CONCLUSION: B2M was significantly associated with both frailty phenotype and
index in elderly Chinese population. The findings underscore the promising kidney
relevant biomarkers for identifying vulnerable elderly Chinese population.

DOI: 10.2147/CIA.S142507 
PMCID: PMC5652941
PMID: 29081654  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of
interest in this work.


106. J Cardiothorac Surg. 2017 Oct 26;12(1):91. doi: 10.1186/s13019-017-0655-8.

Home-based preoperative rehabilitation (prehab) to improve physical function and 
reduce hospital length of stay for frail patients undergoing coronary artery
bypass graft and valve surgery.

Waite I(1)(2), Deshpande R(3), Baghai M(3), Massey T(3), Wendler O(3), Greenwood 
S(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiotherapy, Kings College Hospital NHS Trust, London,
England. Iain.waite@nhs.net.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Kings College Hospital NHS Trust, London, England.
Iain.waite@nhs.net.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Kings College Hospital NHS Trust, London, England.
(4)Department of Physiotherapy and Renal Medicine, Kings College Hospital,
London, England.
(5)Renal Medicine, Division of Transplantation Immunology & Mucosal Biology,
King's College London, London, England.

BACKGROUND: Evidence suggests that elective cardiac patients are at risk of
functional and psychological deterioration in the time preceding surgery. This
poses a risk to successful post-operative rehabilitation. This prospective
one-group pre-test, post-test evaluation was designed to assess a clinical
Pre-operative Rehabilitation (PREHAB) home-based exercise programme, to optimise 
pre-operative physical function and frailty in patients awaiting elective
Coronary Artery By-Pass Graft (CABG) or Valve Surgery.
METHOD: Consenting patients awaiting cardiac surgery, with wait time ≥ 6 weeks
were referred to a Senior Physiotherapist for baseline assessment. Patients were 
offered PREHAB in the form of functional home-based exercise that was prescribed 
from baseline physical outcomes. All patients were followed up via telephone to
ensure progression of exercise and any problems associated with it. This
continued weekly until the patient attended Surgical Pre-assessment clinic, where
all outcome measures were re-assessed.
RESULTS: Twenty two patients, out of a total number of 36 patients seen in the
surgical clinic between March 2016 and August 2016, participated in the prehab
clinical evaluation. Twenty patients completed their prescribed exercises on a
weekly basis prior to surgery. No adverse events or cardiac symptoms were
reported as a result of the home exercise intervention. Paired t-Test analyses
revealed a significant mean difference in clinical frailty score (CFS) of
-0.53 ± 0.51 (95% CI [-0.774, -0.279], P = 0.0003). Significant mean difference
in six-minute walk test (6MWT) distance of 42.5 ± 27.8 m (95% CI [23.840,
61.251], P = 0.0005), 6MWT walking speed of 0.5 ± 0.4kmh (95% CI, [0.2433,
0.7567], P = 0.001), and short physical performance battery (SPPB) total score of
2.2 ± 1.7, (95% CI [3.066, 1.200], P = 0.0002) were also observed. The change in 
6MWT distance was shown to be significantly associated with hospital length of
stay (LOS) (r = 0.7; P = 0.03).
CONCLUSION: This small exploratory evaluation suggests that providing a
home-based PREHAB programme for frail patients undergoing CABG or Valve surgery
may be able to improve functional ability and reduce hospital length of stay for 
those patients undergoing cardiac surgery. A frailty score with greater
sensitivity may be required to elucidate the influence frailty could have in
reducing length of stay. A large randomised controlled study is required to
reveal the potential beneficial effects of PREHAB in this patient population.

DOI: 10.1186/s13019-017-0655-8 
PMCID: PMC5658994
PMID: 29073924  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Ann Cardiothorac Surg. 2017 Sep;6(5):484-492. doi: 10.21037/acs.2017.08.03.

Parsimonious assessment for reoperative aortic valve replacement; the deterrent
effect of low left ventricular ejection fraction and renal impairment.

Yammine M(1), Ramirez-Del Val F(1), Ejiofor JI(1), Neely RC(1), Shi D(1), McGurk 
S(1), Aranki SF(1), Kaneko T(1), Shekar PS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiac Surgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Patient comorbidities play a pivotal role in the surgical outcomes of
reoperative aortic valve replacement (re-AVR). Low left ventricular ejection
fraction (LVEF) and renal insufficiency (Cr >2 mg/dL) are known independent
surgical risk factors. Improved preoperative risk assessment can help determine
the best therapeutic approach. We hypothesize that re-AVR patients with low LVEF 
and concomitant renal insufficiency have a prohibitive surgical risk and may
benefit from transcatheter AVR (TAVR).
METHODS: From January 2002 to March 2013, we reviewed 232 patients who underwent 
isolated re-AVR. Patients older than 80 years were excluded to adjust for
unobserved frailty. We identified 37 patients with a ≤35% LVEF (low ejection
fraction group-LEF) and 195 patients with >35% LVEF (High ejection fraction
group-HEF).
RESULTS: The mean age was 68.4±11.5 years and there were more females (86.5%
versus 64.1%, P=0.007) in the LEF group. The prevalence of renal insufficiency
was higher in LEF patients (27% versus 5.6%, P=0.001). Higher operative mortality
(13.5% versus 3.1%, P=0.018) was observed in the LEF group. Stroke rates were
similar in both groups (8.1% versus 4.1%, P=0.39). Unadjusted cumulative survival
was significantly lower in LEF patients (6.6 years, 95% CI: 5.2-8.0, versus 9.7
years, 95% CI: 8.9-10.4, P=0.024). In patients without renal insufficiency, LEF
and HEF had similar survival (8.3 years, 95% CI: 7.1-9.5, versus 9.9 years, 95%
CI: 9.1-10.6, P=0.90). Contrarily, in patients with renal insufficiency, LEF led 
to a significantly lower survival (1.1 years, 95% CI: 0.1-2.0, versus 4.8 years, 
95% CI: 2.2-7.3, P=0.050). Adjusted survival analysis revealed elevations in
baseline creatinine (HR =4.28, P<0.001) and LEF (HR =5.33, P=0.041) as
significant predictors of long-term survival, with a significant interaction
between these comorbidities (HR =7.28, P<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: In re-AVR patients, low LVEF (≤35%) is associated with increased
operative mortality. Concomitant renal insufficiency in these patients results in
a prohibitively low cumulative survival. These reoperative surgical outcomes
should warrant expanding the role of TAVR for reoperative patients with LEF and
renal impairment.

DOI: 10.21037/acs.2017.08.03 
PMCID: PMC5639216
PMID: 29062743 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The authors have no
conflicts of interest to declare.


108. JAMA Surg. 2018 Feb 1;153(2):160-168. doi: 10.1001/jamasurg.2017.4007.

Association of Patient Frailty With Increased Morbidity After Common Ambulatory
General Surgery Operations.

Seib CD(1), Rochefort H(1), Chomsky-Higgins K(1), Gosnell JE(1), Suh I(1), Shen
WT(1), Duh QY(1), Finlayson E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of California, San Francisco.

Importance: Frailty is a measure of decreased physiological reserve that is
associated with morbidity and mortality in major elective and emergency general
surgery operations, independent of chronological age. To date, the association of
frailty with outcomes in ambulatory general surgery has not been established.
Objective: To determine the association between frailty and perioperative
morbidity in patients undergoing ambulatory general surgery operations.
Design, Setting, and Participants: A retrospective cohort study was conducted of 
140 828 patients older than 40 years of age from the 2007-2010 American College
of Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement Program Participant Use File
who underwent ambulatory and 23-hour-stay hernia, breast, thyroid, or parathyroid
surgery. Data analysis was performed from August 18, 2016, to June 21, 2017.
Main Outcomes and Measures: The association between the National Surgical Quality
Improvement Program modified frailty index and perioperative morbidity was
determined via multivariable logistic regression with random-effects modeling to 
control for clustering within Current Procedural Terminology codes.
Results: A total of 140 828 patients (80 147 women and 60 681 men; mean [SD] age,
59.3 [12.0] years) underwent ambulatory hernia (n = 71 455), breast (n = 51 267),
thyroid, or parathyroid surgery (n = 18 106). Of these patients, 2457 (1.7%)
experienced any type of perioperative complication and 971 (0.7%) experienced
serious perioperative complications. An increasing modified frailty index was
associated with a stepwise increase in the incidence of complications. In
multivariable analysis adjusting for age, sex, race/ethnicity, anesthesia type,
tobacco use, renal failure, corticosteroid use, and clustering by Current
Procedural Terminology codes, an intermediate modified frailty index score
(0.18-0.35, corresponding to 2-3 frailty traits) was associated with
statistically significant odds ratios of 1.70 (95% CI, 1.54-1.88; P < .001) for
any complication and 2.00 (95% CI, 1.72-2.34; P < .001) for serious
complications. A high modified frailty index score (≥0.36, corresponding to ≥4
frailty traits) was associated with statistically significant odds ratios of 3.35
(95% CI, 2.52-4.46; P < .001) for any complication and 3.95 (95% CI, 2.65-5.87;
P < .001) for serious complications. Anesthesia with local and monitored
anesthesia care was the only modifiable covariate associated with decreased odds 
of serious 30-day complications, with an adjusted odds ratio of 0.66 (95% CI,
0.53-0.81; P < .001).
Conclusions and Relevance: Frailty is associated with increased perioperative
morbidity in common ambulatory general surgery operations, independent of age,
type of anesthesia, and other comorbidities. Surgeons should consider frailty
rather than chronological age when counseling and selecting patients for elective
ambulatory surgery.

DOI: 10.1001/jamasurg.2017.4007 
PMCID: PMC5838594
PMID: 29049457 


109. Europace. 2017 Nov 1;19(11):1896-1902. doi: 10.1093/europace/eux288.

Frailty syndrome: an emerging clinical problem in the everyday management of
clinical arrhythmias. The results of the European Heart Rhythm Association
survey.

Fumagalli S(1), Potpara TS(2), Bjerregaard Larsen T(3), Haugaa KH(4), Dobreanu
D(5), Proclemer A(6), Dagres N(7).

Author information: 
(1)Geriatric Intensive Care Unit, Department of Experimental and Clinical
Medicine, University of Florence and AOU Careggi, Viale Pieraccini 6, 50139
Florence, Italy.
(2)School of Medicine, Cardiology Clinic, Clinical Centre of Serbia, University
of Belgrade, Visegradska 26, Belgrade 11000, Serbia.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Cardiovascular Research Centre, Aalborg University
Hospital, Søndre Skovvej 15, DK-9100 Aalborg, Denmark.
(4)Department of Cardiology, Institute for Surgical Research, Institute for
Clinical Medicine, Center for Cardiological Innovation, Oslo University Hospital,
University of Oslo, Rikshospitalet, Sognsvannsveien 20, 0372 Oslo, Norway.
(5)Cardiology Clinic, Emergency Institute for Cardiovascular Diseases and
Transplant, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 540136 Tirgu Mures, Romania.
(6)Cardiology Division, University Hospital S. Maria della Misericordia, P.le
Santa Maria della Misericordia 15, 33100 Udine, Italy.
(7)Department of Electrophysiology, Leipzig University - Heart Centre, 04289
Leipzig, Germany.

The age of patients presenting with complex arrhythmias is increasing. Frailty is
a multifaceted syndrome characterized by an increased vulnerability to stressors 
and a decreased ability to maintain homeostasis. The prevalence of frailty is
associated with age. The aims of this European Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA) EP
Wire survey were to evaluate the proportion of patients with frailty and its
influence on the clinical management of arrhythmias. A total of 41
centres-members of the EHRA Electrophysiology Research Network-in 14 European
countries completed the web-based questionnaire in June 2017. Patients over
70 years represented 53% of the total treated population, with the proportion of 
frail elderly individuals reaching approximately 10%; 91.7% of the responding
centres reported treating frail subjects in the previous year. The respondents
usually recognized frailty based on the presence of problems of mobility,
nutrition, and cognition and inappropriate loss of body weight and muscle mass.
Renal failure, dementia, disability, atrial fibrillation, heart failure, falls,
and cancer were reported to characterize the elderly frail individuals. Atrial
fibrillation was considered the prevalent arrhythmia associated with frailty by
72% of the responding centres, and for stroke prevention, non-vitamin K
antagonist oral anticoagulants were preferred. None of the respondents considered
withholding the prevention of thrombo-embolic events in subjects with a history
of falls. All participants have agreed that cardiac resynchronization therapy
exerts positive effects including improvement in cardiac, physical, and cognitive
performance and quality of life. The majority of respondents preferred an
Arrhythmia Team to manage this special population of elderly patients, and many
would like having a simple tool to quickly assess the presence of frailty to
guide their decisions, particularly on the use of complex cardiac implantable
electrical devices (CIEDs). In conclusion, the complex clinical condition in
frail patients presenting with arrhythmias warrants an integrated
multidisciplinary approach both for the management of rhythm disturbances and for
the decision on using CIEDs.

Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. ©
The Author 2017. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/europace/eux288 
PMID: 29040554  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


110. F1000Res. 2017 Jul 27;6:1242. doi: 10.12688/f1000research.10683.1. eCollection
2017.

Recent advances in cancer surgery in older patients.

Rostoft S(1)(2), Audisio RA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(2)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(3)St Helens Teaching Hospital Trust, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.

Age is the most important risk factor for the occurrence of cancer, and a
declining mortality from heart disease and other non-cancer causes leaves an
older population that is at high risk of developing cancer. Choosing the optimal 
treatment for older cancer patients may be a challenge. Firstly, older age and
associated factors such as comorbidities, functional limitations, and cognitive
impairment are risk factors for adverse effects of cancer treatment. Secondly,
older patients are often excluded from clinical trials, and current clinical
guidelines rarely address how to manage cancer in patients who have comorbidities
or functional limitations. The importance of incorporating frailty assessment
into the preoperative evaluation of older surgical patients has received
increasing attention over the last 10 years. Furthermore, studies that include
endpoints such as functional status, cognitive status, and quality of life beyond
the standard endpoints, i.e. postoperative morbidity and mortality, are starting 
to emerge. This review looks at recent evidence regarding geriatric assessment
and frailty in older surgical cancer patients and provides a summary of newer
studies in colorectal, liver, pancreatic, and gynecological cancer and renal and 
central nervous system tumors.

DOI: 10.12688/f1000research.10683.1 
PMCID: PMC5532794
PMID: 29034078 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare that
they have no competing interests.No competing interests were disclosed.No
competing interests were disclosed.


111. Kidney Blood Press Res. 2017;42(3):575-586. doi: 10.1159/000480674. Epub 2017 Sep
18.

The Clinical Significance of Physical Activity in Maintenance Dialysis Patients.

Kang SH(1), Do JY(1), Jeong HY(2), Lee SY(2), Kim JC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, Yeungnam University
Hospital, Daegu, Republic of Korea.
(2)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, CHA Bundang Medical
Center, CHA University School of Medicine, Seongnam, Republic of Korea.
(3)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, CHA Gumi Medical
Center, CHA University, Gumi, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: The aim of the present study was to evaluate the effects of physical 
activity on various aspects in Asian dialysis patients.
METHODS: This was a retrospective cohort study. Study participants were recruited
from 27 hospitals or dialysis centers in Korea (n = 1611). The participants were 
divided into 3 groups according to the degree of regular exercise: Inactive
group, Intermediate group, and Active group.
RESULTS: The proportions of patients with frailty and the presence of each
component decreased as physical activity increased. The presence and numbers of
disabilities decreased as physical activity increased. The number of participants
with a history of fall during the last 12 months was 149 (20.5%) in the Inactive 
group, 88 (16.9%) in the Intermediate group, and 48 (13.2%) in the Active group. 
Physical component scale and mental component scale scores increased as physical 
activity increased. The survival rate for all-cause death at 500 days was 95.5%
in the Active group, 95.2% in the Intermediate group, and 93.5% in the Inactive
group.
CONCLUSION: High physical activity was associated with favorable results for most
health-related quality of life scale scores, including frailty, disability, and
exhaustion, in Korean dialysis patients.

© 2017 The Author(s). Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000480674 
PMID: 29017151  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Int J Cardiol. 2017 Dec 15;249:249-256. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2017.09.159. Epub
2017 Sep 19.

Clinical conundrums in antithrombotic therapy management: A Delphi Consensus
panel.

Colonna P(1), Andreotti F(2), Ageno W(3), Pengo V(4), Marchionni N(5).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Department, Policlinico of Bari Hospital, Bari, Italy. Electronic
address: colonna@tiscali.it.
(2)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Catholic University, Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Insubria and
Ospedale di Circolo, Varese, Italy.
(4)Department of Cardiac, Thoracic, and Vascular Sciences, Padua University
Hospital, Padua, Italy.
(5)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine and Division of General
Cardiology, University of Florence and AOU Careggi, Florence, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Anticoagulants are recommended for the prevention of stroke/systemic 
embolism for most patients with atrial fibrillation (AF) and for the treatment of
patients with venous thromboembolism (VTE). Regulatory-driven randomized trials, 
however, typically exclude extreme patient scenarios involving, for instance,
severe bleeding, ischaemic risk, frailty or renal impairment, despite their
common occurrence in clinical practice. Uncertainty in the management of such
cases leads to a high degree of variability in therapeutic approaches. Consensus 
conferences or panels may provide insights and help bridge the gaps that separate
clinical guidelines from real-world practice. In the present study, a description
of challenging AF and VTE patients was submitted to a large panel of experts to
investigate areas of common or divergent management.
METHOD: A modified-Delphi method was used to obtain consensus among 178 Italian
AF and VTE specialists. A questionnaire was sent on the appropriateness of
anticoagulant therapy in AF and VTE cases, including CHA2DS2-VASc=1, comorbid
coronary artery disease, frailty, advanced age, risk of falling, prior
haemorrhagic stroke, and low- or intermediate-risk pulmonary embolism. Strategies
to improve guideline adherence were also investigated.
RESULTS: All participants completed the questionnaire. Consensus was reached on
many, but not all cases, leaving uncertainty on some debated topics (conundrums) 
where decisions are unsupported by clinical studies or driven by controversial
results.
CONCLUSIONS: The indications emerging from this large panel of experts may help
guide the management of challenging AF or VTE cases. Studies are needed
addressing treatment options in those cases for whom no consensus was reached.

Copyright © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2017.09.159 
PMID: 28970039  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Korean Med Sci. 2017 Nov;32(11):1800-1806. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2017.32.11.1800.

Is Frailty a Modifiable Risk Factor of Future Adverse Outcomes in Elderly
Patients with Incident End-Stage Renal Disease?

Lee SW(1)(2), Lee A(3), Yu MY(4), Kim SW(3), Kim KI(3)(5), Na KY(1)(3)(5), Chae
DW(1)(3)(5), Kim CH(3)(5), Chin HJ(3)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Postgraduate
School, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Eulji General Hospital, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital,
Seongnam, Korea.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul,
Korea.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea. mednep@snubh.org.

Little is known about the clinical significance of frailty and changes of frailty
after dialysis initiation in elderly patients with end-stage renal disease
(ESRD). We prospectively enrolled 46 elderly patients with incident ESRD at a
dialysis center of a tertiary hospital between May 2013 and March 2015. Frailty
was assessed by using a comprehensive geriatric assessment protocol and defined
as a multidimensional frailty score of ≥ 10. The main outcome was the composite
of all-cause death or cardiovascular hospitalization, as determined in June 2016.
The median age of the 46 participants was 71.5 years, and 63.0% of them were men.
During the median 17.7 months follow-up, the rate of composite outcome was 17.4%.
In multivariate logistic regression analysis, after adjusting for age, sex,
diabetes, body mass index (BMI), and time of predialytic nephrologic care, female
sex, and increased BMI were associated with increased and decreased odds of
frailty, respectively. In multivariate Cox proportional hazards analysis, after
adjusting for age, sex, diabetes, BMI, and time of predialytic nephrologic care, 
frailty was significantly associated with the composite adverse outcome. In
repeated frailty assessments, the multidimensional frailty score significantly
improved 12 months after the initiation of dialysis, which largely relied on
improved nutrition. Therefore, frailty needs to be assessed for risk
stratification in elderly patients with incident ESRD.

© 2017 The Korean Academy of Medical Sciences.

DOI: 10.3346/jkms.2017.32.11.1800 
PMCID: PMC5639060
PMID: 28960032  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no potential conflicts of
interest to disclose.


114. Eur J Intern Med. 2018 Jan;47:69-74. doi: 10.1016/j.ejim.2017.09.020. Epub 2017
Sep 24.

Baseline functional status as the strongest predictor of in-hospital mortality in
elderly patients with non-valvular atrial fibrillation: Results of the NONAVASC
registry.

Gullón A(1), Formiga F(2), Camafort M(3), Mostaza JM(4), Díez-Manglano J(5),
Cepeda JM(6), Novo-Veleiro I(7), Pose A(8), Suárez Fernández C(9); NONAVASC study
group. Vascular Risk Group of the Spanish Society of Internal Medicine.

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine Department, University Hospital of La Princesa, Madrid,
Spain. Electronic address: a.gullon.ojesto@hotmail.com.
(2)Internal Medicine Department, Geriatric Unit, University Hospital of
Bellvitge, L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain. Electronic address:
fformiga@bellvitgehospital.cat.
(3)Internal Medicine Department, University Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain.
Electronic address: miguel.camafort@gmail.com.
(4)Internal Medicine Department, University Hospital of La Paz-Carlos III,
Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: josemaria.mostaza@salud.madrid.org.
(5)Internal Medicine Department, University Hospital Miguel Servet, Zaragoza,
Spain. Electronic address: jdiez@aragon.es.
(6)Internal Medicine Department, Hospital Vega Baja, Orihuela, Alicante, Spain.
Electronic address: jmcepedarodrigo@gmail.com.
(7)Internal Medicine Department, University Hospital of Santiago de Compostela,
Santiago de Compostela, Spain. Electronic address:
ignacio.novo.veleiro@gmail.com.
(8)Internal Medicine Department, University Hospital of Santiago de Compostela,
Santiago de Compostela, Spain. Electronic address: antonioposereino@gmail.com.
(9)Internal Medicine Department, University Hospital of La Princesa, Madrid,
Spain. Electronic address: csuarezf@salud.madrid.org.

OBJECTIVES: Atrial fibrillation (AF) has been associated with higher mortality.
We aimed to identify the baseline predictors of in-hospital mortality among
elderly patients with non-valvular AF (NVAF) hospitalised for any reason.
METHODS: Observational, prospective and multicentre study was carried out on
patients with NVAF over the age of 75, who had been admitted for any acute
medical condition to Internal Medicine departments in Spain.
RESULTS: We evaluated 804 patients with a mean age of 85±5.1years, of which 53.9%
were females. During the hospitalization 10.1% (n=81) of the patients died. The
patients who died were older, had a greater percentage of institutionalization,
worse previous basic functional status (Barthel Index), worse cognitive
performance at admission and greater proportion of frailty and sarcopenia.
Logistic regression multivariate analysis identified that the strongest
determinants of in-hospital mortality were the baseline functional status
(Barthel Index) (OR for total dependency 4.73, 95% CI 2.32-9.63), and admissions 
for stroke (OR 3.55, 95% CI 1.41-8.90) and acute renal failure (OR 1.93, 95% CI
1.12-3.32).
CONCLUSION: The overall in-hospital mortality of elderly patients with NVFA is
high. Among all factors evaluated in the global geriatric assessment the baseline
functional status was the strongest predictor for in-hospital mortality on this
population.

Copyright © 2017 European Federation of Internal Medicine. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejim.2017.09.020 
PMID: 28954714  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Ann Thorac Surg. 2017 Dec;104(6):1939-1946. doi:
10.1016/j.athoracsur.2017.05.067. Epub 2017 Sep 21.

Assessment of Commonly Used Frailty Markers for High- and Extreme-Risk Patients
Undergoing Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement.

Forcillo J(1), Condado JF(2), Ko YA(3), Yuan M(3), Binongo JN(3), Ndubisi NM(4), 
Kelly JJ(5), Babaliaros V(2), Guyton RA(5), Devireddy C(2), Leshnower BG(2),
Stewart JP(2), Perrault LP(4), Khairy P(6), Thourani VH(7).

Author information: 
(1)Structural Heart and Valve Center, Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Joseph 
B. Whitehead Department of Surgery, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia; Department of Cardiac Surgery, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec,
Canada.
(2)Division of Cardiology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia.
(3)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Rollins School of Public
Health, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia.
(4)Department of Cardiac Surgery, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec,
Canada.
(5)Structural Heart and Valve Center, Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Joseph 
B. Whitehead Department of Surgery, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia.
(6)Department of Cardiology, Montreal Heart Institute, Université de Montréal,
Montréal, Québec, Canada.
(7)Structural Heart and Valve Center, Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Joseph 
B. Whitehead Department of Surgery, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia. Electronic address: vthoura@emory.edu.

BACKGROUND: The effect of frailty on outcomes after transcatheter aortic valve
replacement (TAVR) remains incompletely understood. The objective of this study
was to evaluate the performance of four commonly used frailty markers as
predictors of early and late outcomes among patients undergoing TAVR.
METHODS: A review was performed of 361 high- and extreme-risk patients undergoing
TAVR from 2011 to 2015. Four frailty variables were assessed: serum albumin
(g/dL), 5-m walk (seconds), grip strength (kg), and Katz index of independence in
activities of daily living. Logistic regression was used to examine the
association between the frailty indicators and 30-day composite of mortality,
stroke, new heart block requiring permanent pacemaker, major or life-threatening 
bleeding, acute renal failure, major vascular complication, and 30-day
readmission rate. Minimum distance to the perfect point (0, 1) was performed to
delineate a cutoff point for each frailty indicator, and risk models were
compared using receiver-operating characteristics curves.
RESULTS: The composite of outcomes occurred in 28% of patients. Serum albumin,
activities of daily living, and 5-m walk were independent predictors for 30-day
composite outcomes, but only albumin was predictive of 30-day mortality. A new
frailty model (four frailty indicators, age, and sex) to predict 30-day mortality
was created and compared with The Society of Thoracic Surgeons predicted risk of 
mortality. Better discrimination was found with the new frailty model (area under
the curve 0.74 versus 0.58). New individual frailty variable cutoff values were
found to predict our composite of events.
CONCLUSIONS: Among high- and extreme-risk patients undergoing TAVR, our new
frailty model was more discriminative of 30-day mortality than The Society of
Thoracic Surgeons predicted risk of mortality. New cutoff values for frailty
indicators were identified and will require further validation.

Copyright © 2017 The Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2017.05.067 
PMID: 28942076  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Nutr Clin Pract. 2017 Oct;32(5):682-686. doi: 10.1177/0884533617697936. Epub 2017
Mar 22.

Effect of Self-Reported Distress Thermometer Score on the Maximal Handgrip and
Pinch Strength Measurements in Hemodialysis Patients.

Camilleri S(1), Chong S(1), Tangvoraphonkchai K(1), Yoowannakul S(1), Davenport
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 UCL Centre for Nephrology, Royal Free Hospital, University College London,
London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Muscle weakness is a risk factor for mortality in hemodialysis (HD)
patients. Muscle strength measurements are routinely used as a screening tool but
depend on patient cooperation and motivation. We wished to determine whether
measuring maximal voluntary muscle strength was affected by patient self-reported
distress.
METHODS: We measured pinch strength (PS) and handgrip strength (HGS) in 382 adult
HD patients with a corresponding self-reported distress thermometer (DT) scores. 
Postdialysis body composition measurements were made using multifrequency
bioelectrical assessments and patients assessed for frailty.
RESULTS: Mean age was 66.4 ± 14.9 years, with 238 males (62%), 48% diabetic, and 
dialysis vintage 36 (15-75) months. The mean DT score was 4.4 ± 3.3, with a
frailty score of 4.6 ± 1.5. On multivariable analysis, DT scores were associated 
with frailty (β = 0.35, P = .003), prescription of aspirin for cardiac disease (β
= 1.0, P = .004), lean body mass (β = 0.04, P = .004), and negatively with age (β
= -0.05, P < .001), hematocrit (β = -8.2, P = .004), and maximum PS (β = -1.4, P 
= .003).
CONCLUSION: Paradoxically higher self-reported DT scores were associated with
younger age and lean body mass. As such, younger healthier, rather than more
comorbid, patients may have greater expectations for their health and therefore
report more distress. We found no association between DT scores and HGS, and as
such, although HGS is a voluntary test, it appears to be a robust test
independent of patient stresses. However, PS was lower in patients with higher DT
scores, and as such, greater care may be required in interpreting these
measurements.

DOI: 10.1177/0884533617697936 
PMID: 28937925  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Intensive Care Med. 2017 Dec;43(12):1820-1828. doi: 10.1007/s00134-017-4940-8.
Epub 2017 Sep 21.

The impact of frailty on ICU and 30-day mortality and the level of care in very
elderly patients (≥ 80 years).

Flaatten H(1)(2), De Lange DW(3), Morandi A(4)(5), Andersen FH(6)(7), Artigas
A(8), Bertolini G(9), Boumendil A(10), Cecconi M(11), Christensen S(12), Faraldi 
L(13), Fjølner J(12), Jung C(14), Marsh B(15), Moreno R(16), Oeyen S(17), Öhman
CA(18), Pinto BB(19), Soliman IW(20), Szczeklik W(21), Valentin A(22), Watson
X(11), Zaferidis T(23), Guidet B(24)(25)(26); VIP1 study group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
hans.flaatten@uib.no.
(2)Department of Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, Haukeland University Hospital,
Bergen, Norway. hans.flaatten@uib.no.
(3)Department of Intensive Care Medicine, University Medical Center, University
Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Rehabilitation Hospital Ancelle di Cremona, Cremona, Italy.
(5)Geriatric Research Group, Brescia, Italy.
(6)Department of Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, Ålesund Hospital, Ålesund,
Norway.
(7)Department of Circulation and Medical Imaging, NTNU, Trondheim, Norway.
(8)Department of Intensive Care Medecine, CIBER Enfermedades Respiratorias,
Corporacion Sanitaria Universitaria Parc Tauli, Autonomous University of
Barcelona, Sabadell, Spain.
(9)Laboratorio di Epidemiologia Clinica, Centro di Coordinamento GiViTI Dipar
timento di Salute Pubblica, IRCCS-Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche "Mario
Negri", Villa Camozzi, 24020, Ranica (Bergamo), Italy.
(10)Unite de Recherche en Epidemiologie Systemes d'Information et Mode lisation
U707, Institut national de la sante et de la recherche medicale, Paris, France.
(11)St George's University Hospital, London, UK.
(12)Department of Anaesthesia and Intensive Care Medicine, Aarhus University
Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.
(13)Grande Ospedale Metropolitano Niguarda, Milan, Italy.
(14)Department of Cardiology, Pulmonology and Angiology, University Hospital,
Düsseldorf, Germany.
(15)Mater Misericordiae University Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
(16)Unidade de Cuidados Intensivos Neurocríticos, Hospital de São José, Centro
Hospitalar de Lisboa Central, Faculdade de Ciência Médicas de Lisboa, Nova
Médical School, Lisbon, Portugal.
(17)Department of Intensive Care 1K12IC, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent,
Belgium.
(18)Karolinska University Hospital, Solna, Sweden.
(19)Geneva University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland.
(20)Department of Intensive Care, University Medical Center, University Utrecht, 
Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(21)Intensive Care and Perioperative Medicine Division, Jagiellonian University
Medical College, Kraków, Poland.
(22)Kardinal Schwarzenberg Hospital, Schwarzach, Austria.
(23)Intensive Care Unit General Hospital of Larissa Tsakalof, Larissa, Greece.
(24)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Saint-Antoine, service de
réanimation médicale, Paris, France.
(25)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, Institut Pierre Louis
d'Epidémiologie et de Santé Publique, Paris, France.
(26)INSERM, Institut Pierre Louis d'Epidémiologie et de Santé Publique, Paris,
France.

Comment in
    Intensive Care Med. 2017 Dec;43(12 ):1884-1886.
    Intensive Care Med. 2017 Dec;43(12 ):1887-1888.

PURPOSE: Very old critical ill patients are a rapid expanding group in the ICU.
Indications for admission, triage criteria and level of care are frequently
discussed for such patients. However, most relevant outcome studies in this group
frequently find an increased mortality and a reduced quality of life in
survivors. The main objective was to study the impact of frailty compared with
other variables with regards to short-term outcome in the very old ICU
population.
METHODS: A transnational prospective cohort study from October 2016 to May 2017
with 30 days follow-up was set up by the European Society of Intensive Care
Medicine. In total 311 ICUs from 21 European countries participated. The ICUs
included the first consecutive 20 very old (≥ 80 years) patients admitted to the 
ICU within a 3-month inclusion period. Frailty, SOFA score and therapeutic
procedures were registered, in addition to limitations of care. For measurement
of frailty the Clinical Frailty Scale was used at ICU admission. The main
outcomes were ICU and 30-day mortality and survival at 30 days.
RESULTS: A total of 5021 patients with a median age of 84 years (IQR 81-86 years)
were included in the final analysis, 2404 (47.9%) were women. Admission was
classified as acute in 4215 (83.9%) of the patients. Overall ICU and 30-day
mortality rates were 22.1% and 32.6%. During ICU stay 23.8% of the patients did
not receive specific ICU procedures: ventilation, vasoactive drugs or renal
replacement therapy. Frailty (values ≥ 5) was found in 43.1% and was
independently related to 30-day survival (HR 1.54; 95% CI 1.38-1.73) for frail
versus non-frail.
CONCLUSIONS: Among very old patients (≥ 80 years) admitted to the ICU, the
consecutive classes in Clinical Frailty Scale were inversely associated with
short-term survival. The scale had a very low number of missing data. These
findings provide support to add frailty to the clinical assessment in this
patient group.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov (ID: NCT03134807).

DOI: 10.1007/s00134-017-4940-8 
PMID: 28936626  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens. 2017 Nov;26(6):537-542. doi:
10.1097/MNH.0000000000000364.

The impact of frailty on outcomes in dialysis.

Sy J(1), Johansen KL.

Author information: 
(1)aDivision of Nephrology, University of California, San Francisco bDivision of 
Nephrology, San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco,
California, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Frailty is highly prevalent in the dialysis population and is 
associated with mortality. Recent studies have suggested that other dialysis
outcomes are compromised in frail individuals. While we do not yet have a
consensus as to the best measure of frailty, identification of these poor
outcomes and their magnitude of association with frailty will help improve
prognostication, allow for earlier interventions, and improve provider-to-patient
communication.
RECENT FINDINGS: The most widely used assessment of frailty is Fried's physical
performance criteria. However, regardless of assessment method, frailty remains
highly associated with mortality. More recently, frailty has been associated with
falls, fractures, cognitive impairment, vascular access failure, and poor quality
of life. Recent large cohort studies provide strong evidence that frailty
assessment can provide important prognostic information for providers and
patients both before and after initiation of dialysis. Trials aimed at improving 
frailty are limited and show the promise of augmenting quality of life, although 
more studies are needed to firmly establish mortality benefits.
SUMMARY: We underscore the importance of frailty as a prognostic indicator and
identify other recently established consequences of frailty. Widespread adoption 
of frailty assessment remains limited and researchers continue to find ways of
simplifying the data collection process. Timely and regular assessment of frailty
may allow for interventions that can mitigate the onset of poor outcomes and
identify actionable targets for dialysis providers.

DOI: 10.1097/MNH.0000000000000364 
PMID: 28901990  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Transplantation. 2018 Feb;102(2):291-299. doi: 10.1097/TP.0000000000001943.

Frailty and Postkidney Transplant Health-Related Quality of Life.

McAdams-DeMarco MA(1)(2), Olorundare IO(1), Ying H(1), Warsame F(1), Haugen
CE(1), Hall R(3), Garonzik-Wang JM(1), Desai NM(1), Walston JD(4), Norman SP(5), 
Segev DL(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
MD.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins School of Public Health, Baltimore, 
MD.
(3)Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC.
(4)Division of Geriatric Medicine and Gerontology, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD.
(5)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Michigan School of Medicine, Ann Arbor, MI.

Comment in
    Transplantation. 2018 Feb;102(2):183-184.

BACKGROUND: Health-related quality of life (HRQOL) reflects a patient's disease
burden, treatment effectiveness, and health status and is summarized by physical,
mental, and kidney disease-specific scales among end-stage renal disease
patients. Although on average HRQOL improves postkidney transplant (KT), the
degree of change depends on the ability of the patient to withstand the stressor 
of dialysis versus the ability to tolerate the intense physiologic changes of KT.
Frail KT recipients may be extra vulnerable to either of these stressors, thus
affecting change in HRQOL after KT.
METHODS: We ascertained frailty, as well as physical, mental, and kidney
disease-specific HRQOL in a multicenter prospective cohort of 443 KT recipients
(May 2014 to May 2017) using Kidney Disease Quality of Life Instrument Short
Form. We quantified the short-term (3 months) rate of post-KT HRQOL change by
frailty status using adjusted mixed-effects linear regression models.
RESULTS: Mean HRQOL scores at KT were 43.3 (SD, 9.6) for physical, 52.8 (SD, 8.9)
for mental, and 72.6 (SD, 12.8) for kidney disease-specific HRQOL; frail
recipients had worse physical (P < 0.001) and kidney disease-specific HRQOL (P = 
0.001), but similar mental HRQOL (P = 0.43). Frail recipients experienced
significantly greater rates of improvement in physical HRQOL (frail, 1.35
points/month; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.65-2.05; nonfrail, 0.34
points/month; 95% CI, -0.17-0.85; P = 0.02) and kidney disease-specific HRQOL
(frail, 3.75 points/month; 95% CI, 2.89-4.60; nonfrail, 2.41 points/month; 95%
CI, 1.78-3.04; P = 0.01), but no difference in mental HRQOL (frail, 0.54
points/month; 95% CI, -0.17-1.25; nonfrail, 0.46 points/month; 95% CI,
-0.06-0.98; P = 0.85) post-KT.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite decreased physiologic reserve, frail recipients experience
improvement in post-KT physical and kidney disease-specific HRQOL better than
nonfrail recipients.

DOI: 10.1097/TP.0000000000001943 
PMCID: PMC5790611
PMID: 28885489  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Geriatr Cardiol. 2017 Jul;14(7):457-464. doi:
10.11909/j.issn.1671-5411.2017.07.005.

Update on pharmacological treatment of acute coronary syndrome without persistent
ST segment elevation myocardial infarction in the elderly.

Usta C(1), Bedel A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, Akdeniz University, Antalya, 
Turkey.

The increase in cardiovascular disease prevalence with ageing has been attributed
to several age-related changes such as changes in the vascular wall elasticity,
the coagulation and haemostatic system and endothelial dysfunction, among other
causes. There is a 50% increased mortality risk per 10-year increase in age
starting at 65 years old. Here, we aimed to discuss pharmacological treatment in 
acute coronary syndrome (ACS) without persistent ST segment elevation myocardial 
infarction in the elderly. The main aim of ACS treatment in elderly people is at 
preventing ischemia, myocardial damage and complications. A meta-analysis
suggests that invasive revascularization therapy is probably most useful in older
patients. Dual antiplatelet therapy is currently the standard of care post-ACS.
Platelet P2Y12 inhibitors are among the most commonly used medications worldwide,
due to their established benefits in the treatment and prevention of arterial
thrombosis. The main recommendation is to tailor antithrombotic treatment,
considering body weight, renal function (Class I, level C) and careful evaluation
of life expectancy, comorbidities, risk/benefit profile, quality of life and
frailty when invasive strategies are considered (Class IIa, level A) on top of
the different recommendations given for a general non ST elevation ACS
population. It is obvious that potent P2Y12 inhibitors will continue to play an
important role in pharmacological treatment for elderly ACS patients in the
future.

DOI: 10.11909/j.issn.1671-5411.2017.07.005 
PMCID: PMC5545188
PMID: 28868074 


121. Anesth Analg. 2018 Jan;126(1):39-45. doi: 10.1213/ANE.0000000000002411.

A Comparison of Three Frailty Indices in Predicting Morbidity and Mortality After
On-Pump Aortic Valve Replacement.

Esses G(1), Andreopoulos E(2), Lin HM(2), Arya S(3), Deiner S(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Anesthesiology.
(2)Population Health Science and Policy and Anesthesiology, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York.
(3)Division of Vascular Surgery and Endovascular Therapy, Department of Surgery, 
Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia.
(4)Departments of Anesthesiology, Neurosurgery, Geriatrics & Palliative Care,
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York.

BACKGROUND: Aortic valve replacement is a high-risk surgery (3%-5%, 30-day
mortality) performed on approximately 30,000 elderly patients a year in the
United States. Currently, preoperative risk assessment is based on a composite of
medical examination and a subjective evaluation for frailty ("eyeball test").
Objective frailty assessment using validated indices has the potential to improve
risk stratification. The purpose of this study was to (1) establish whether
frailty can predict 30-day mortality and composite morbidity in patients
undergoing aortic valve replacement and (2) compare the predictive ability of 3
frailty indices in this population.
METHODS: This study was a retrospective cohort study of 3088 patients 65 years
old and older undergoing aortic valve replacement surgery (based on current
procedure terminology codes) between the years 2006 and 2012 extracted from the
American College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement Program
database. Frailty was assessed using the modified frailty index, risk analysis
index, and Ganapathi indices. Outcomes measured were 30-day mortality and
composite morbidity (myocardial infarction, cardiac arrest, pulmonary embolism,
pneumonia, reintubation, renal insufficiency, coma >24 hours, urinary tract
infections, sepsis, deep vein thrombosis, deep wound surgical site infection,
superficial site infection, and reoperation).
RESULTS: Frailty was a better predictor of mortality than morbidity, and it was
not markedly different among any of the 3 indices. Frailty was associated with an
increased risk of 30-day mortality and longer lengths of stay.
CONCLUSIONS: Frailty can predict mortality in patients undergoing aortic valve
replacement. Choice of frailty index does not make a difference in this patient
population.

DOI: 10.1213/ANE.0000000000002411 
PMID: 28857797  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Rev Med Suisse. 2017 Aug 23;13(571):1410-1415.

[DPP-4 or SGLT2 inhibitor added to metformin alone in type 2 diabetes].

[Article in French; Abstract available in French from the publisher]

Paquot N(1), Scheen AJ(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Université de Liège, Service de diabétologie, nutrition et maladies
métaboliques, CHU Liège, Belgique.
(2)Unité de pharmacologie clinique, CHU Sart Tilman, 4000 Liège, Belgique.

After failure of a monotherapy with metformin, dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors 
(gliptins) and sodium-glucose cotransporters type 2 (gliflozins) offer an
alternative to the add-on of a sulphonylurea, especially in diabetic patients at 
risk of hypoglycaemia. The choice between a gliptin and a gliflozin may be guided
by the individual patient characteristics : rather a gliptin in a patient without
obesity or severe hyperglycaemia, in an elderly patient, with a frailty profile
or with renal impairment; rather a gliflozin in an obese patient, with
hypertension, hyperuricaemia, antecedents of cardiovascular disease (especially
heart failure), without advanced renal insufficiency and with a low risk of
urinary/genital infections or events linked to dehydration such as hypotension.

Publisher: Après échec d’une monothérapie par metformine, les inhibiteurs de la
dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (gliptines) et les inhibiteurs des cotransporteurs
sodium-glucose de type 2 (gliflozines) offrent une alternative à un traitement
par sulfamides, en particulier chez les patients diabétiques à risque
d’hypoglycémie. Le choix peut être orienté en fonction des caractéristiques
individuelles du patient considéré : plutôt une gliptine chez un patient pas trop
obèse ni trop hyperglycémique, relativement âgé, avec un profil fragilisé,
éventuellement insuffisant rénal ; plutôt une gliflozine chez un patient obèse,
hypertendu, hyperuricémique, avec des antécédents cardiovasculaires (insuffisance
cardiaque), sans insuffisance rénale avancée et avec un faible risque
d’infections urogénitales ou de phénomènes de déshydratation/hypotension.

PMID: 28837277 

Conflict of interest statement: N. Paquot a reçu des honoraires comme orateur ou 
membre d’un conseil scientifique de la part des firmes Merck Sharp & Dohme,
Boehringer Ingelheim et NovoNordisk. A. Scheen déclare avoir reçu des honoraires 
comme orateur, membre d’un conseil scientifique ou investigateur clinicien de la 
part des firmes AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Janssen, Lilly, Merck Sharp & 
Dohme, Novartis, NovoNordisk, et Sanofi. Il a été investigateur clinicien dans
les études EMPA-REG OUTCOME, TECOS, CANVAS-R et LEADER. Les données concernant la
protection cardiovasculaire et rénale prodiguée par les inhibiteurs des SGLT2,
démontrée dans EMPA-REG OUTCOME avec l’empagliflozine, ont été confirmées
récemment dans CANVAS avec la canagliflozine. Le lecteur intéressé est invité à
prendre connaissance de l’article, publié dans le même numéro, intitulé:
Protection cardio-rénale par les inhibiteurs des SGLT2 (gliflozines) : d’EMPA-REG
OUTCOME à CANVAS. Rev Med Suisse 2017;13:1421-6.


123. Am J Transplant. 2017 Dec;17(12):3159-3171. doi: 10.1111/ajt.14459. Epub 2017 Sep
15.

Long-term outcome of renal transplantation from octogenarian donors: A
multicenter controlled study.

Ruggenenti P(1)(2), Silvestre C(3), Boschiero L(4), Rota G(5), Furian L(3), Perna
A(2), Rossini G(6), Remuzzi G(1)(2)(7), Rigotti P(3).

Author information: 
(1)IRCCS - Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri, Clinical Research
Center for Rare Diseases Aldo e Cele Daccò, Bergamo, Italy.
(2)Nephrology and Dialysis Unit, Azienda Socio Sanitaria Territoriale (ASST) Papa
Giovanni XXIII, Bergamo, Italy.
(3)Kidney and Pancreas Transplant Unit, University Hospital of Padua, Padua,
Italy.
(4)Kidney Transplantation Unit, Department of Surgery, Azienda
Ospedaliero-Universitaria (AOUI) di Verona, Verona, Italy.
(5)Kidney Transplantation Center, Unit of Pediatric Surgery, Azienda Socio
Sanitaria Territoriale (ASST) Papa Giovanni XXIII, Bergamo, Italy.
(6)Organ and Tissue Transplant Immunology Unit, Foundation IRCCS "Ca' Granda
Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico", Milan, Italy.
(7)Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, University of Milan, Milan,
Italy.

To assess whether biopsy-guided selection of kidneys from very old brain-dead
donors enables more successful transplantations, the authors of this multicenter,
observational study compared graft survival between 37 recipients of 1 or 2
histologically evaluated kidneys from donors older than 80 years and 198
reference-recipients of non-histologically evaluated single grafts from donors
aged 60 years and younger (transplantation period: 2006-2013 at 3 Italian
centers). During a median (interquartile range) of 25 (13-42) months, 2
recipients (5.4%) and 10 reference-recipients (5.1%) required dialysis (crude and
donor age- and sex-adjusted hazard ratio [95% confidence interval] 1.55
[0.34-7.12], P = .576 and 1.41 [0.10-19.54], P = .798, respectively). Shared
frailty analyses confirmed similar outcomes in a 1:2 propensity score study
comparing recipients with 74 reference-recipients matched by center, year, donor,
and recipient sex and age. Serum creatinine was similar across groups during
84-month follow-up. Recipients had remarkably shorter waiting times than did
reference-recipients and matched reference-recipients (7.5 [4.0-19.5] vs 36
[19-56] and 40 [24-56] months, respectively, P < .0001 for both comparisons).
Mean (± SD) kidney donor risk index was 2.57 ± 0.32 in recipients vs 1.09 ± 0.24 
and 1.14 ± 0.24 in reference-recipients and matched reference-recipients
(P < .0001 for both comparisons). Adverse events were similar across groups.
Biopsy-guided allocation of kidneys from octogenarian donors permits further
expansion of the donor organ pool and faster access to a kidney transplant,
without increasing the risk of premature graft failure.

© 2017 The American Society of Transplantation and the American Society of
Transplant Surgeons.

DOI: 10.1111/ajt.14459 
PMID: 28792681  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Arrhythm. 2017 Aug;33(4):297-301. doi: 10.1016/j.joa.2016.12.001. Epub 2017 Mar
9.

Study design of GENERAL (general practitioners and embolism prevention in NVAF
patients treated with rivaroxaban: Real-life evidence): A multicenter prospective
cohort study in primary care physicians to investigate the effectiveness and
safety of rivaroxaban in Japanese patients with NVAF.

Kusano K(1), Akao M(2), Tsuji H(3), Matsui K(4), Hiramitsu S(5), Hatori Y(6),
Odakura H(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, National Cerebral and Cardiovascular
Center, Japan.
(2)Department of Cardiology, National Hospital Organization Kyoto Medical Center,
Japan.
(3)Tsuji Clinic, Japan.
(4)Kumamoto University Hospital, Japan.
(5)Hiramitsu Heart Clinic, Japan.
(6)Hatori Clinic, Japan.
(7)Dobashi Naika Clinic, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Rivaroxaban, a direct oral anticoagulant (DOAC), has become available
for stroke prevention in patients with non-valular atrial fibrillation (NVAF).
However, little is known about its effectiveness and safety when prescribed by
general practitioners in real-life settings.
METHODS: GENERAL is a multicenter, prospective, non-interventional observational 
study of patients receiving rivaroxaban for NVAF in daily clinical practice
prescribed specifically by general practitioners. The target number of
participating medical institutions is 500-700 clinics with fewer than 20 beds and
the target number of participants is 5000. The baseline clinical data, including 
antidementia medication and frailty, and follow-up data including concomitant
treatment and outcomes until September 2018 (maximum three years) will be
collected. The primary efficacy endpoints will be stroke and/or systemic embolism
and the secondary endpoints will be major bleeding meeting the ISTH guidelines,
non-major and clinically relevant bleeding, onset of symptomatic stroke
(ischemic/hemorrhagic), systemic embolism, deep vein thrombosis/pulmonary
thromboembolism, myocardial infarction and/or cardiovascular death, and systemic 
embolism. Based on the provided information, the event assessment committee will 
investigate the endpoint-related events. The annual incidence and predictive
factors for primary/secondary endpoint will be investigated based on underlying
disease, age, renal function, and CHADS2, CHA2DS2-VASC, and HAS-BLED scores using
Cox regression. We will also compare the incidence of the primary/secondary
endpoint between the present study, EXPAND study, and FUSHIMI AF registry study.
RESULTS: The results of this study are currently under investigation.
CONCLUSION: This study will provide important information regarding the
effectiveness and safety of rivaroxaban treatment in Japanese patients with NVAF 
among general practitioners.

DOI: 10.1016/j.joa.2016.12.001 
PMCID: PMC5529321
PMID: 28765760 


125. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2017 Nov;27(9):1863-1871. doi:
10.1097/IGC.0000000000001097.

Ovarian Cancer in Elderly Patients: Patterns of Care and Treatment Outcomes
According to Age and Modified Frailty Index.

Ferrero A(1), Fuso L, Tripodi E, Tana R, Daniele A, Zanfagnin V, Perotto S,
Gadducci A.

Author information: 
(1)*Academic Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, University of Torino,
Mauriziano Hospital, Torino; and †Division of Gynaecology and Obstetrics,
Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Pisa, Pisa,
Italy.

OBJECTIVE: The present study assessed the predictive value of age and Modified
Frailty Index (mFI) on the management of primary epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) 
patients aged 70 years or older (elderly).
METHODS: A retrospective multicenter study selected elderly EOC patients treated 
between 2006 and 2014. Treatments were analyzed according to the following age
group categories: (1) 70 to 75 years versus (2) older than 75 years, and mFI of
less than 4 (low frailty) versus greater than or equal to 4 (high frailty).
RESULTS: Seventy-eight patients were identified (40 in age group 1 and 38 in age 
group 2). The mFI was greater than or equal to 4 in 23 women. Median age of low
frailty and high frailty was not significantly different (75.6 vs 75.3).
Comorbidities were equally distributed according to age, whereas diabetes,
hypertension, obesity, and chronic renal failure were more frequent in the
high-frailty group. Performance status was different only according to mFI.
Twenty percent of age group 1 versus 55.3% of age group 2 underwent none or only 
explorative surgical approach (P = 0.003), whereas surgical approaches were
similar in the 2 frailty groups. The rate of postoperative complications was
higher in high-frailty patients compared with low-frailty patients (23.5% vs
4.3%; P = 0.03). Chemotherapy was administered to all the patients, a monotherapy
regimen to 50% of them. No differences in toxicity were registered, except more
hospital recovery in the high-frailty cohort. Median survival time was in favor
of younger patients (98 versus 30 months) and less-frailty patients (56 vs 27
months).
CONCLUSIONS: Elderly EOC patients can receive an adequate treatment, but patients
who are older than 75 years can be undertreated, if not adequately selected. The 
pretreatment assessment of frailty through mFI could be suggested in the surgical
and medical management.

DOI: 10.1097/IGC.0000000000001097 
PMID: 28763363  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Saudi J Kidney Dis Transpl. 2017 Jul-Aug;28(4):716-724.

Assessment of frailty in elderly pre-dialysis population using simple tools.

Ali H(1), Abdelaal F(1), Baharani J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Renal Medicine, Heart of England Teaching Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust, Birmingham, United Kingdom.

Prevalence of chronic kidney disease (CKD) is increasing worldwide principally
among the elderly population many of whom will eventually need renal replacement 
therapy. The relationship between frailty and CKD in the elderly population has
been recognized. However, studies concentrating on frailty in pre-dialysis
patients are limited. CKD predisposes to frailty through many potential
mechanisms; anemia, bone mineral disease, oxidative stress, and malnutrition
which in turn lead to progression of CKD culminating in a vicious cycle.
Identifying potential causes of frailty in elderly pre-dialysis patients and
recognizing individuals at risk should be an area of focus to nephrologists and
researchers. Modalities that may improve frailty in elderly pre-dialysis patients
such as treatment of anemia and bone mineral disease may improve outcome.
However, this has not been established and further research is needed. The aim of
this review is to address the importance of recognizing frailty in elderly
pre-dialysis patients using simple tools and describing its implications on
clinical outcome.


PMID: 28748872 


127. PLoS One. 2017 Jul 25;12(7):e0180423. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0180423.
eCollection 2017.

Decreases in heart rate variability are associated with postoperative
complications in hip fracture patients.

Ernst G(1)(2), Watne LO(3)(4)(5), Frihagen F(3)(5), Wyller TB(3)(5), Dominik
A(6), Rostrup M(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anaesthesiology, Kongsberg hospital, Kongsberg, Norway.
(2)Section of Cardiovascular and Renal Research, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, 
Norway.
(3)Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(4)Department of Behavioural Sciences in Medicine, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(5)Oslo Delirium Research Group, Department of Geriatric Medicine, Oslo
University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(6)THM University of Applied Sciences, KITE, Giessen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: To explore relevant associations between deviations in linear and
nonlinear heart rate variability (HRV) scores, and short-term morbidity and
mortality in patients undergoing hip-surgery after a fracture.
METHODS: 165 patients with hip fractures being admitted for surgery at two
hospitals were included in a prospective cohort study. A short-term ECG was
recorded within 24 hours of arrival. 15 patients had to be excluded due to
insufficient quality of the ECG recordings. 150 patients were included in the
final analysis. Linear parameters were calculated in time domain: standard
deviation of NN intervals (SDNN), root mean square of successive differences
(rMSSD); and frequency domain: Total Power (TP), High Frequency Power (HF), Low
Frequency Power (LF), Very Low Frequency Power (VLF), and the ratio of LF/HF.
Postoperative outcome was evaluated at the time of discharge. This included
occurrence of pneumonia, overall infection rate, stroke, myocardial infarction,
and all-cause mortality.
RESULTS: Patients experiencing complications had significantly lower rMSSD (p =
0.04), and TP (p = 0.03) preoperatively. Postoperative infections were predicted 
by decreased VLF preoperatively (p = 0.04). There was a significant association
between pneumonia and LF/HF<1 (p = 0.03). The likelihood ratio to develop
pneumonia when LF/HF < 1 was 6,1.
CONCLUSION: HRV seems to reflect the general frailty of the patient with hip
fracture and might be used to identify patients in need of increased surveillance
or prophylactic treatment.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0180423 
PMCID: PMC5526500
PMID: 28742855  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Ann Vasc Surg. 2018 Jan;46:168-177. doi: 10.1016/j.avsg.2017.07.007. Epub 2017
Jul 21.

Modified Frailty Index Can Be Used to Predict Adverse Outcomes and Mortality
after Lower Extremity Bypass Surgery.

Ali TZ(1), Lehman EB(2), Aziz F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Vascular Surgery, Penn State Heart and Vascular Institute,
Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine, Hershey, PA.
(2)Department of Public Health Sciences, Pennsylvania State University, College
of Medicine, Hershey, PA.
(3)Division of Vascular Surgery, Penn State Heart and Vascular Institute,
Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine, Hershey, PA. Electronic
address: faziz@hmc.psu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Frailty has been increasingly used as a prognostic indicator for
various surgical operations. Patients with peripheral arterial disease represent 
a cohort of population with advanced medical comorbidities. The aim of this study
is to correlate the postoperative outcomes after lower extremity bypass surgery
with preoperative modified frailty index (mFI).
METHODS: Using 2010 American College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality
Improvement Program database, patients undergoing infrainguinal arterial bypass
surgery were identified. mFI with 11 variables, based on the Canadian Study of
Health and Aging Frailty Index, was utilized. Based on mFI score, the patients
were divided into 4 groups: group 1 (mFI score: 0-0.09), group 2 (mFI score:
0.18-0.27), group 3 (mFI score: 0.36-0.45), and group 4 (mFI score: 0.54-0.63). A
bivariate and multivariate analysis was done using logistic regression analysis.
RESULTS: A total of 4,704 patients (64% males and 36% females) underwent
infrainguinal arterial bypass. Mean age was 67.9 ± 11.7 years. Distribution of
patients based on mFI was as follows: group 1: 14.6%, group 2: 55.9%, group 3:
26.9%, and group 4: 2.6%. Increase in mFI was associated with higher mortality
rates. Incidence of mortality for group 1 was 0.6%; for group 2, it was 1.4%; for
group 3, it was 4%; and for group 4, it was 7.4%. Likewise, the incidence of
other postoperative complications such as myocardial infarction (MI), stroke,
progressive renal failure, and graft failure was significantly high among
patients with high mFI scores. Following factors were associated with increased
risk of mortality: high mFI score, black race, dialysis dependency, postoperative
renal insufficiency, MI, and postoperative acute renal failure.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that the mFI can be used as a valuable tool 
to identify patients at a higher risk for developing postoperative complications 
after lower extremity revascularization. For patients with mFI score of
0.54-0.63, the risk of mortality and complications increases significantly. mFI
can be used as a useful screening tool to identify patients who are at a high
risk for developing complications.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.avsg.2017.07.007 
PMID: 28739453  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2017 Sep 7;12(9):1480-1488. doi: 10.2215/CJN.11801116.
Epub 2017 Jul 17.

Frailty Screening Tools for Elderly Patients Incident to Dialysis.

van Loon IN(1)(2)(3), Goto NA(4), Boereboom FTJ(5)(2), Bots ML(6), Verhaar MC(3),
Hamaker ME(7).

Author information: 
(1)Dianet Dialysis Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands; i.vanloon@dianet.nl.
(2)Departments of Internal Medicine and.
(3)Departments of Nephrology and Hypertension and.
(4)Geriatrics and.
(5)Dianet Dialysis Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(6)Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care, University Medical Center 
Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(7)Geriatrics, Diakonessenhuis Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands; and.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: A geriatric assessment is an appropriate method for
identifying frail elderly patients. In CKD, it may contribute to optimize
personalized care. However, a geriatric assessment is time consuming. The purpose
of our study was to compare easy to apply frailty screening tools with the
geriatric assessment in patients eligible for dialysis.
DESIGN, SETTING, PARTICIPANTS, & MEASUREMENTS: A total of 123 patients on
incident dialysis ≥65 years old were included <3 weeks before to ≤2 weeks after
dialysis initiation, and all underwent a geriatric assessment. Patients with
impairment in two or more geriatric domains on the geriatric assessment were
considered frail. The diagnostic abilities of six frailty screening tools were
compared with the geriatric assessment: the Fried Frailty Index, the Groningen
Frailty Indicator, Geriatric8, the Identification of Seniors at Risk, the
Hospital Safety Program, and the clinical judgment of the nephrologist. Outcome
measures were sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, and negative
predictive value.
RESULTS: In total, 75% of patients were frail according to the geriatric
assessment. Sensitivity of frailty screening tools ranged from 48% (Fried Frailty
Index) to 88% (Geriatric8). The discriminating features of the clinical judgment 
were comparable with the other screening tools. The Identification of Seniors at 
Risk screening tool had the best discriminating abilities, with a sensitivity of 
74%, a specificity of 80%, a positive predictive value of 91%, and a negative
predictive value of 52%. The negative predictive value was poor for all tools,
which means that almost one half of the patients screened as fit (nonfrail) had
two or more geriatric impairments on the geriatric assessment.
CONCLUSIONS: All frailty screening tools are able to detect geriatric impairment 
in elderly patients eligible for dialysis. However, all applied screening tools, 
including the judgment of the nephrologist, lack the discriminating abilities to 
adequately rule out frailty compared with a geriatric assessment.

Copyright © 2017 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.2215/CJN.11801116 
PMCID: PMC5586582
PMID: 28716855  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


130. PeerJ. 2017 Jul 10;5:e3542. doi: 10.7717/peerj.3542. eCollection 2017.

Frail phenotype might herald bone health worsening among end-stage renal disease 
patients.

Chao CT(1)(2)(3), Huang JW(2), Chan DC(4); Cohort of Geriatric Nephrology in NTUH
(COGENT) study group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital Jinshan branch,
New Taipei City, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(3)Graduate Institute of Toxicology, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Geriatrics and Gerontology, National Taiwan University Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Frailty exhibits a high prevalence in end-stage renal disease (ESRD) 
patients and is associated with adverse health-related outcomes, including falls 
and fractures. Available studies do not address whether frailty is associated
with temporal changes in BMD. We evaluated this issue by analyzing the follow-up 
dual energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) results in an ESRD cohort.
METHODS: In 2015, we enrolled forty-three ESRD patients, divided into frail,
pre-frail, and robust ones based on a validated simple FRAIL scale, all receiving
DXA at baseline. After one year of follow-up, survivors received another DXA, and
we calculated the absolute and percentage changes in area, bone mineral density
(BMD), T-, and Z-scores of lumbar spine and femoral neck (FN) between baseline
and follow-up examinations.
RESULTS: Among all, frail individuals with ESRD had significantly lower average
lumbar spine area, lower L4, FN, and total BMD and T-scores, lower FN and total
Z-scores than non-frail ones, without differences in gender, body mass index,
dialysis duration, and comorbidities. Furthermore, we discovered frail ESRD
patients had significantly more prominent decrease in average lumbar spine area, 
percentage changes in L1 Z-scores and average lumbar spine area, and a trend
toward more prominent decrease in L4 area than non-frail ones after one year of
follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: Baseline frailty might be associated with deteriorating bone health,
including shrinking L-spine areas and a more rapid decrease in L-spine Z scores, 
among ESRD patients. This frailty-bone association should be highlighted during
our care of frail individuals with ESRD.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.3542 
PMCID: PMC5507170
PMID: 28713653 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare there are no competing
interests.


131. Am J Nephrol. 2017;46(2):114-119. doi: 10.1159/000463393. Epub 2017 Jul 14.

Dialysis in the Elderly and Impact of Institutionalization in the United States
Renal Data System.

Brar A(1), Mallappallil M, Stefanov DG, Kau D, Salifu MO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, SUNY Downstate Medical Center, Brooklyn, NY, USA.

BACKGROUND: We hypothesized that in the very elderly dialysis patients in the
United States, institutionalization in nursing homes would increase mortality in 
addition to age alone.
METHODS: Incident dialysis patients from 2001 to 2008 above the age of 70 were
included. Patients above 70 were categorized into 4 groups according to age as
70-75, 76-80, 81-85, and >85 years and further divided into institutionalized and
noninstitutionalized. Kaplan-Meier survival curves were plotted to assess patient
survival.
RESULTS: A total of 349,440 patients were identified above the age of 70 at the
time of initiation of dialysis. For institutionalized patients, the mean survival
was significantly lower, 1.71 ± 0.03 years for those in the age range 70-75, 1.44
± 0.02 years for those in the age range 76-80, 1.25 ± 0.02 years for those in the
age range 81-85, and 1.04 ± 0.02 for those in the >85 years age group (p =
0.0001). The hazard ratio for mortality in institutionalized elderly patients on 
dialysis was 1.80 ([95% CI 1.77-1.83]; p = 0.0001). After adjustment for other
variables (multivariate Cox regression), to be institutionalized was still an
independent risk factor for mortality (adjusted hazard ratio = 1.57 [95% CI
1.54-1.60]; p = 0.0001).
CONCLUSION: There was increased mortality in institutionalized elderly patients
as compared to noninstutionalized elderly patients in the same age group. In
accordance with the increased frailty and decreased benefits of therapies in the 
very elderly, especially in those with additional co-morbidities besides age,
palliative and end-of-life care should be considered.

© 2017 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000463393 
PMID: 28704826  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2017 Oct 1;313(4):F938-F950. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00256.2017. Epub 2017 Jul 12.

Inflammation and premature aging in advanced chronic kidney disease.

Kooman JP(1), Dekker MJ(2), Usvyat LA(3), Kotanko P(4)(5), van der Sande FM(3),
Schalkwijk CG(2), Shiels PG(6), Stenvinkel P(7).

Author information: 
(1)Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands;
Jeroen.kooman@mumc.nl.
(2)Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands.
(3)Fresenius Medical Care North America, Waltham, Massachusetts.
(4)Renal Research Institute, New York, New York.
(5)Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York.
(6)Institute of Cancer Sciences, College of Medical, Veterinary and Life
Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom; and.
(7)Divsion of Renal Medicine, Department of Clinical Science Technology and
Intervention, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

Systemic inflammation in end-stage renal disease is an established risk factor
for mortality and a catalyst for other complications, which are related to a
premature aging phenotype, including muscle wasting, vascular calcification, and 
other forms of premature vascular disease, depression, osteoporosis, and frailty.
Uremic inflammation is also mechanistically related to mechanisms involved in the
aging process, such as telomere shortening, mitochondrial dysfunction, and
altered nutrient sensing, which can have a direct effect on cellular and tissue
function. In addition to uremia-specific causes, such as abnormalities in the
phosphate-Klotho axis, there are remarkable similarities between the
pathophysiology of uremic inflammation and so-called "inflammaging" in the
general population. Potentially relevant, but still somewhat unexplored in this
respect, are abnormal or misplaced protein structures, as well as abnormalities
in tissue homeostasis, which evoke danger signals through damage-associated
molecular patterns, as well as the senescence-associated secretory phenotype.
Systemic inflammation, in combination with the loss of kidney function, can
impair the resilience of the body to external and internal stressors by reduced
functional and structural tissue reserves, and by impairing normal organ
crosstalk, thus providing an explanation for the greatly increased risk of
homeostatic breakdown in this population. In this review, the relationship
between uremic inflammation and a premature aging phenotype, as well as potential
causes and consequences, are discussed.

Copyright © 2017 the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1152/ajprenal.00256.2017 
PMID: 28701312  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Ann Vasc Surg. 2018 Jan;46:97-103. doi: 10.1016/j.avsg.2017.06.150. Epub 2017 Jul
6.

An Accumulated Deficits Model Predicts Perioperative and Long-term Adverse Events
after Carotid Endarterectomy.

Sridharan ND(1), Chaer RA(2), Wu BB(2), Eslami MH(2), Makaroun MS(2), Avgerinos
ED(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Vascular Surgery, Department of Surgery, UPMC, Pittsburgh, PA.
Electronic address: domenickna2@upmc.edu.
(2)Division of Vascular Surgery, Department of Surgery, UPMC, Pittsburgh, PA.

BACKGROUND: There is increasing recognition that decreased reserve in multiple
organ systems, known as accumulated deficits (AD), may better stratify
perioperative risk than traditional risk indices. We hypothesized that an AD
model would predict both perioperative adverse events and long-term survival
after carotid endarterectomy (CEA), particularly important in asymptomatic
patients.
METHODS: Consecutive patients undergoing CEA between 1st January 2000 and 31st
December 2010 were retrospectively identified. Seven of the deficit items from
the Canadian Study of Health and Aging-frailty index (coronary disease, renal
insufficiency, pulmonary disease, peripheral vascular disease, heart failure,
hypertension, and diabetes) were tabulated for each patient. Predictors of
perioperative and long-term outcomes were evaluated using regression analysis.
RESULTS: About 1,782 CEAs in 1,496 patients (mean age: 71.3 ± 9.3 years, 56.3%
male, 35.4% symptomatic) were included. The risk of major adverse events (stroke,
death, or myocardial infarction) at 30 days for patients with ≤3 deficits was
2.53% vs. 8.81% for patients with ≥4 deficits (P < 0.001). For patients with ≥5
deficits, the risk was 15.18%. Each additional deficit increased the odds of a
30-day major adverse event and hospital stay >2 days by 1.64 (P < 0.001) and 1.15
(P < 0.001), respectively. In multivariate analysis, the presence of ≥4 deficits 
was more predictive of perioperative major adverse events (odds ratio [OR] =
3.62, P < 0.001) than symptomatology within 6 months (OR = 1.57, P = 0.08) or
octogenarian status (OR = 2.00, P = 0.02). Kaplan-Meier analysis showed
significantly decreased survival over time with accumulating deficits
(P < 0.001). Patients with ≥4 deficits have a hazards ratio for death of 2.6
compared to patients with ≤3 deficits (P < 0.001). Overall survival is estimated 
at 79.5% (95% confidence interval [CI]: 0.77-0.82) at 5 years in patients with ≤3
deficits versus 52.4% (95% CI: 0.46-0.58) in patients with ≥4 deficits,
respectively. In subgroup analysis of asymptomatic patients, 5-year survival for 
octogenarian male patients with ≥4 deficits was only 26.8%. For asymptomatic
males aged 70-79 years with ≥4 deficits, 5-year survival was 59.9%.
CONCLUSIONS: An AD model is more predictive of perioperative adverse events after
CEA than age or symptomatic status. This model remains predictive of long-term
survival. In asymptomatic male octogenarians with 4 or more AD, 5-year survival
is severely limited.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.avsg.2017.06.150 
PMCID: PMC5828018
PMID: 28689950  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Nephrol. 2017 Dec;30(6):729-741. doi: 10.1007/s40620-017-0420-z. Epub 2017 Jul 
8.

Barriers to exercise for patients with renal disease: an integrative review.

Hannan M(1), Bronas UG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biobehavioral Health Science (M/C 802), College of Nursing,
University of Illinois at Chicago, 845 S. Damen Avenue, Chicago, IL, 60612-7350, 
USA. mhanna22@uic.edu.
(2)Department of Biobehavioral Health Science (M/C 802), College of Nursing,
University of Illinois at Chicago, 845 S. Damen Avenue, Chicago, IL, 60612-7350, 
USA.

Renal disease is a common health condition that leads to loss of physical
function, frailty, and premature loss of independence in addition to other severe
comorbidities and increased mortality. Increased levels of physical activity and 
initiation of exercise training is recommended in the current guidelines for all 
patients with renal disease, but participation and adherence rates are low. The
barriers to exercise and physical activity in patients with renal disease are not
well defined and currently based on patient provider perception and opinion.
There have been no published reviews that have synthesized published findings on 
patient reported barriers to exercise. This integrative literature review
therefore aimed to identify the current understanding of patient reported
barriers to regular exercise. This integrative review found that patient
perceived barriers to exercise are not consistent with the barriers that have
been identified by renal disease specialists and healthcare providers, which were
disinterest, lack of motivation, and being incapable of exercise. The patient
reported barriers identified through this review were complex and diverse, and
the most frequently reported patient perceived barrier to exercise was low energy
levels and fatigue. It is clear that additional research to identify patient
perceived barriers to exercise is needed and that patient directed interventions 
to address these barriers should be developed. This integrative review provides
information to the interdisciplinary nephrology team that can be used to tailor
their assessment of barriers to exercise and provide exercise education for
patients with renal disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s40620-017-0420-z 
PMID: 28689231  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Heart. 2017 Dec;103(24):1970-1976. doi: 10.1136/heartjnl-2016-311004. Epub 2017
Jul 6.

Five-year follow-up after transcatheter aortic valve implantation for symptomatic
aortic stenosis.

Zahn R(1), Werner N(1), Gerckens U(2), Linke A(3), Sievert H(4), Kahlert P(5),
Hambrecht R(6), Sack S(7), Abdel-Wahab M(8), Hoffmann E(9), Zeymer U(1),
Schneider S(10); German Transcatheter Aortic Valve Interventions—Registry
investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung für Kardiologie, Herzzentrum Ludwigshafen, Ludwigshafen, Germany.
(2)none, Bonn, Germany.
(3)Klinik für Kardiologie, Herzzentrum Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
(4)Klinik für Kardiologie, CardioVasculäres Centrum Frankfurt,
Katharinenkrankenhaus, Frankfurt, Germany.
(5)Klinik für Kardiologie, Westdeutsches Herz- und Gefäßzentrum Essen,
Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany.
(6)Klinik für Kardiologie, Herzzentrum Bremen, Bremen, Germany.
(7)Abteilung für Kardiologie, Klinikum München Schwabing, Munich, Germany.
(8)Abteilung für Kardiologie, Segeberger Kliniken, Bad Segeberg, Germany.
(9)Abteilung für Kardiologie, Städtisches Klinikum München-Bogenhausen, Munich,
Germany.
(10)Stiftung Institut für Herzinfarktforschung, Luwigshafen, Germany.

OBJECTIVES: Transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI) has been implemented
into the care of elderly patients suffering from severe symptomatic aortic
stenosis. However, data on long-term follow-up are sparse and predictors of
long-term mortality need to be evaluated to better select patients. Therefore, we
aimed to analyse predictors of 5-year mortality after TAVI.
METHODS: We analysed data from the German Transcatheter Aortic Valve
Interventions-Registry. Each of the 27 participating hospitals agreed to include 
all consecutive TAVI patients at their institution. Out of 1444 patients treated 
with TAVI, 1378 patients had a follow-up of at least 4.5 years (completeness
95.4%). Endpoint for this analysis was 5-year survival. Cox regression analysis
was used to determine risk factors associated with this endpoint.
RESULTS: Patients who died were compared with survivors. The two groups showed
multiple differences in patient characteristics, indications for interventions,
preinterventional, as well as interventional characteristics and
postinterventional events. Calculated 1-year mortality was 21.8% and 5-year
mortality 59.1%. A higher logistic EuroScore was associated with a lower 5-year
survival, being 45.5% in patients with a logistic EuroScore of <20%, 34.5% in
those with 20% to 40% and 28.4% in patients with a logistic EuroScore >40%. Cox
proportional hazard analysis revealed the following independent predictors of
5-year mortality: female gender (HR =0.66, 95% CI 0.56 to 0.77, p<0.0001), renal 
failure (HR=1.43, 95% CI 1.22 to 1.69, p<0.0001), prior mitral regurgitation ≥II°
(HR=1.42, 95% CI 1.21 to 1.65, p<0.0001), residual aortic regurgitation ≥II°
(HR=1.52, 95% CI 1.24 to 1.85, p<0.0001), atrial fibrillation (HR=1.38, 95% CI
1.18 to 1.64, p=0.0001), low gradient aortic stenosis (HR=1.48, 95% CI 1.19 to
1.84, p=0.0004), prior decompensation (HR=1.32, 95% CI 1.13 to 1.54, p=0.0006),
frailty (HR=1.31, 95% CI 1.09 to 1.58, p=0.004), surgical TAVI (HR=1.42, 95% CI
1.12 to 1.80, p=0.004), age (by year) (HR=1.02, 95% CI 1.01 to 1.03, p=0.006),
prior myocardial infarction (HR=1.29, 95% CI 1.07 to 1.57, p=0.009), urgent TAVI 
(HR=1.25, 95% CI 1.04 to 51, p=0.020) and diabetes mellitus (HR=1.20, 95% CI 1.02
to 1.40, p=0.024).
CONCLUSIONS: These data from the early TAVI experience show a 5-year mortality of
59.1%. Some of the predictors of 5-year mortality seem to be modifiable, such as 
residual aortic regurgitation, type of TAVI access route and concomitant mitral
regurgitation.

© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of 
the article) 2017. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless
otherwise expressly granted.

DOI: 10.1136/heartjnl-2016-311004 
PMID: 28684438  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: AL, HS, PK, MA-W, SS worked 
as proctors for either Medtronic or Edwards or both and received speakers’
honoraria. UG worked as proctor and consultant and received speakers´ honoraria
from Medtronic Inc. and Boston Scientific Inc. HS is member of the scientific
advisory board of JenaValve technology. RZ and EH have received research funding 
from Medtronic and Edwards Lifesciences.


136. Syst Rev. 2017 Jul 6;6(1):133. doi: 10.1186/s13643-017-0536-1.

Physical frailty and functional status in patients with advanced kidney disease: 
a protocol for a systematic review.

Brett KE(1), Bennett A(2), Ritchie LJ(2), Knoll GA(2)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Epidemiology Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, 501 Smyth
Road, Ottawa, Ontario, K1H 8L6, Canada. kebrett@ohri.ca.
(2)Clinical Epidemiology Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, 501 Smyth
Road, Ottawa, Ontario, K1H 8L6, Canada.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Division of Nephrology, Kidney Research Centre, Ottawa Hospital Research
Institute, Ottawa, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Predicting outcomes in those with chronic kidney disease or following
transplantation is challenging, and current models lack detailed patient-level
information. Frailty and poor functional status are risk factors for adverse
patient outcomes that may be useful additions to prognostic tools in patients
with chronic kidney disease. The purpose of this systematic review is to examine 
whether frailty or functional status are associated with increased risk of
mortality or adverse clinical outcomes in patients with advanced kidney disease.
METHODS/DESIGN: We will conduct a systematic review to identify and evaluate
studies linking frailty and functional status with patient outcomes in
populations with advanced kidney disease. We will search MEDLINE, Embase, and the
Cochrane Central Register for Controlled Trials. Two reviewers will conduct all
screening and data extraction independently. A modified version of the Quality In
Prognosis Studies tool will be used to evaluate the quality of the studies. If
meta-analysis of outcome data is possible, a random effects model will be used.
DISCUSSION: The results of this review will inform the development, selection,
and validation of appropriate metrics needed to improve prognostication in
patients with chronic kidney disease.
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW REGISTRATION: PROSPERO CRD42016045251.

DOI: 10.1186/s13643-017-0536-1 
PMCID: PMC5501003
PMID: 28683777  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Biometrics. 2018 Mar;74(1):289-299. doi: 10.1111/biom.12739. Epub 2017 Jul 6.

Evaluating center performance in the competing risks setting: Application to
outcomes of wait-listed end-stage renal disease patients.

Dharmarajan SH(1), Schaubel DE(1), Saran R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan,
U.S.A.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, 
U.S.A.

It is often of interest to compare centers or healthcare providers on quality of 
care delivered. We consider the setting where evaluation of center performance on
multiple competing events is of interest. We propose estimating center effects
through cause-specific proportional hazards frailty models that allow correlation
among a center's cause-specific effects. Estimation of our model proceeds via
penalized partial likelihood and is implemented in R. To evaluate center
performance, we also propose a directly standardized excess cumulative incidence 
(ECI) measure. Therefore, based on our proposed methods, practitioners can
evaluate centers either through the cause-specific hazards or the cumulative
incidence functions. We demonstrate, through simulations, the advantages of the
proposed methods to detect outlying centers, by comparing the proposed methods
and existing methods which assume uncorrelated random center effects. In
addition, we develop a Correlation Score Test to test the null hypothesis that
the competing event processes within a center are correlated. Using data from the
Scientific Registry of Transplant Recipients, we apply our method to evaluate the
performance of Organ Procurement Organizations on two competing risks: (i)
receipt of a kidney transplant and (ii) death on the wait-list.

© 2017, The International Biometric Society.

DOI: 10.1111/biom.12739 
PMID: 28682445 


138. BMC Nephrol. 2017 Jul 6;18(1):217. doi: 10.1186/s12882-017-0621-7.

Quality of life as indicator of poor outcome in hemodialysis: relation with
mortality in different age groups.

van Loon IN(1)(2)(3), Bots ML(4), Boereboom FTJ(5)(6), Grooteman MPC(7),
Blankestijn PJ(8), van den Dorpel MA(9), Nubé MJ(7), Ter Wee PM(7), Verhaar
MC(8), Hamaker ME(10).

Author information: 
(1)Dianet Dialysis Center, Brennerbaan 130, 3524, BN, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
i.vanloon@dianet.nl.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Diakonessenhuis Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands. i.vanloon@dianet.nl.
(3)Department of Nephrology and Hypertension, University Medical Center Utrecht, 
Utrecht, The Netherlands. i.vanloon@dianet.nl.
(4)Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care, University Medical Center 
Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(5)Dianet Dialysis Center, Brennerbaan 130, 3524, BN, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Diakonessenhuis Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands.
(7)Department of Nephrology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.
(8)Department of Nephrology and Hypertension, University Medical Center Utrecht, 
Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(9)Department of Internal Medicine, Maasstad Hospital, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.
(10)Department of Geriatrics, Diakonessenhuis Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Physical, cognitive and psychosocial functioning are frequently
impaired in dialysis patients and impairment in these domains relates to poor
outcome. The aim of this analysis was to compare the prevalence of impairment as 
measured by the Kidney Disease Quality of Life- Short Form (KDQOL-SF) subscales
between the different age categories and to assess whether the association of
these subscales with mortality differs between younger and older dialysis
patients.
METHODS: This study included data from 714 prevalent hemodialysis patients, from 
26 centres, who were enrolled in the CONvective TRAnsport STudy (CONTRAST
NCT00205556, 09-12-2005). Baseline HRQOL domains were evaluated for patients
<65 years, 65-74 years and over 75 years. Multivariable Cox proportional hazards 
analyses were performed to assess the relation between the separate domains and
2-year mortality.
RESULTS: Emotional health was higher in patients over the age of 75 compared to
younger patients (mean level 71, 73 and 77 for increasing age categories
respectively, p = 0.02), whilst physical functioning was significantly lower in
older patients (mean level 60, 48 and 40, p < 0.01). A low level of physical
functioning (Hazard Ratio (HR) 1.72 [95%Confidence Interval (CI) 1.02-2.73]),
emotional health (HR 1.85 [95% 1.30-2.63]), and social functioning (HR 1.59 [95% 
CI 1.12-2.26]), was individually associated with an increased 2-year mortality
within the whole population. The absence of effect modification suggests no
evidence for different relations within the older age groups.
CONCLUSIONS: In dialysis patients, older age is associated with lower levels of
physical functioning, whilst the level of emotional health is not associated with
age. KDQOL-SF domains physical functioning, emotional health and social
functioning are independently associated with mortality in prevalent younger and 
older hemodialysis patients.

DOI: 10.1186/s12882-017-0621-7 
PMCID: PMC5498985
PMID: 28679361  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Anaesth Intensive Care. 2017 Jul;45(4):466-468.

Does anyone ever expect to die?

Anstey M(1), Watts N(2), Orford N(3), Seppelt IM(4), Mitchell I(5).

Author information: 
(1)Intensivist, Intensive Care Unit, Sir Charles Gairdner Hospital, Adjunct
Researcher, Curtin University School of Public Health, Perth, Western Australia.
(2)Post Doctoral Research Fellow, Critical Care and Trauma Division, The George
Institute for Global Health, Sydney, New South Wales.
(3)Intensive Care Specialist, Intensive Care, University Hospital, Geelong,
Victoria.
(4)Senior Staff Specialist, Intensive Care, Nepean Hospital, Critical Care and
Trauma Division, The George Institute for Global Health, Sydney, New South Wales.
(5)Director, Intensive Care Unit, Canberra Hospital, Associate Professor, ANU
Medical School, Canberra, Australian Capital Territory.

Patients who come to the intensive care unit are amongst the sickest patients in 
our hospitals. Patients can be admitted to the intensive care unit unexpectedly
(following accidents or sudden onset of illness) or as unplanned but not
necessarily truly 'unexpected' admissions. These patients often have significant 
underlying chronic health issues, including metastatic cancer, advanced cardiac, 
respiratory, renal, or hepatic failure, or frailty, with a high likelihood of
death in the ensuing months. Using the Australian and New Zealand Intensive Care 
Society Clinical Trials Group Point Prevalence Program, a prospective single-day 
observational study across 46 Australian hospitals in 2014 and 2015, we found
that less than 9% of intensive care unit patients (51/577) had an advance
directive available. From these results, we provide two suggestions to increase
intensive care's understanding of patients' end-of-life wishes. First,
systematically target 'high risk of dying' patient groups for goals of care
conversations in the outpatient setting. Such groups include those where one
would not be 'surprised' if they died within a year. Second, as a society, more
conversations about end-of-life wishes are needed.


PMID: 28673216  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2017 Jul 7;12(7):1090-1099. doi: 10.2215/CJN.12321216.
Epub 2017 Jun 21.

Multicenter Registry Analysis of Center Characteristics Associated with Technique
Failure in Patients on Incident Peritoneal Dialysis.

Htay H(1), Cho Y(1), Pascoe EM(1), Darssan D(1), Nadeau-Fredette AC(1), Hawley
C(1), Clayton PA(1), Borlace M(1), Badve SV(1), Sud K(1), Boudville N(1),
McDonald SP(1), Johnson DW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Due to the number of contributing authors, the affiliations are provided in
the Supplemental Material.
(2)Due to the number of contributing authors, the affiliations are provided in
the Supplemental Material. david.johnson2@health.qld.gov.au.

Comment in
    Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2017 Jul 7;12 (7):1032-1034.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Technique failure is a major limitation of peritoneal 
dialysis. Our study aimed to identify center- and patient-level predictors of
peritoneal dialysis technique failure.
DESIGN, SETTING, PARTICIPANTS, & MEASUREMENTS: All patients on incident
peritoneal dialysis in Australia from 2004 to 2014 were included in the study
using data from the Australia and New Zealand Dialysis and Transplant Registry.
Center- and patient-level characteristics associated with technique failure were 
evaluated using Cox shared frailty models. Death-censored technique failure and
cause-specific technique failure were analyzed as secondary outcomes.
RESULTS: The study included 9362 patients from 51 centers in Australia. The
technique failure rate was 0.35 (95% confidence interval, 0.34 to 0.36) episodes 
per patient-year, with a sevenfold variation across centers that was mainly
associated with center-level characteristics. Technique failure was significantly
less likely in centers with larger proportions of patients treated with
peritoneal dialysis (>29%; adjusted hazard ratio, 0.83; 95% confidence interval, 
0.73 to 0.94) and more likely in smaller centers (<16 new patients per year;
adjusted hazard ratio, 1.10; 95% confidence interval, 1.00 to 1.21) and centers
with lower proportions of patients achieving target baseline serum phosphate
levels (<40%; adjusted hazard ratio, 1.15; 95% confidence interval, 1.03 to
1.29). Similar results were observed for death-censored technique failure, except
that center target phosphate achievement was not significantly associated.
Technique failure due to infection, social reasons, mechanical causes, or death
was variably associated with center size, proportion of patients on peritoneal
dialysis, and/or target phosphate achievement, automated peritoneal dialysis
exposure, icodextrin use, and antifungal use. The variation of hazards of
technique failure across centers was reduced by 28% after adjusting for
patient-specific factors and an additional 53% after adding center-specific
factors.
CONCLUSIONS: Technique failure varies widely across centers in Australia. A
significant proportion of this variation is related to potentially modifiable
center characteristics, including peritoneal dialysis center size, proportion of 
patients on peritoneal dialysis, and proportion of patients on peritoneal
dialysis achieving target phosphate level.

Copyright © 2017 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.2215/CJN.12321216 
PMCID: PMC5498362
PMID: 28637862  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Intern Med. 2017;56(12):1527-1529. doi: 10.2169/internalmedicine.56.8120. Epub
2017 Jun 15.

Hypoglycemic Coma Induced by the Use of Succinic Acid Cibenzoline in Frail
Late-stage Elderly Subjects.

Hirata Y(1), Kamei S(1), Tatsumi F(1), Shimoda M(1), Tanabe A(1), Sanada J(1),
Fushimi Y(1), Irie S(1), Mune T(1), Kaku K(1), Kaneto H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Kawasaki Medical School,
Japan.

Succinic acid cibenzoline (CZ) is an antiarrhythmic agent often used for the
treatment of tachyarrhythmia. However, hypoglycemia should be avoided in the
treatment of diabetes. We herein report two late-stage elderly subjects who
experienced a severe and prolonged hypoglycemic coma after the usage of CZ. These
cases suggest that, when CZ is administered to elderly subjects with renal
dysfunction and/or frailty, we should be aware of the possibility that this
medicine may induce hypoglycemia and should adjust the dose as appropriate and
monitor the concentration of CZ to avoid severe hypoglycemia.

DOI: 10.2169/internalmedicine.56.8120 
PMCID: PMC5505908
PMID: 28626178  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Expert Rev Med Devices. 2017 Jul;14(7):505-519. doi:
10.1080/17434440.2017.1342533. Epub 2017 Jun 28.

Wearable sensors: can they benefit patients with chronic kidney disease?

Wieringa FP(1)(2), Broers NJH(2), Kooman JP(3), Van Der Sande FM(3), Van Hoof
C(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)a imec The Netherlands - Wearable Health Solutions , Eindhoven , The
Netherlands.
(2)b Maastricht University , Faculty of Health, Medicine and Life Sciences ,
Maastricht , The Netherlands.
(3)c Maastricht UMC+ - Internal Medicine , Division of Nephrology , Maastricht , 
The Netherlands.
(4)d Katholieke Universiteit Leuven-ESAT , Leuven , Belgium.

INTRODUCTION: This article ponders upon wearable medical measurement devices in
relation to Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD) and its' associated comorbidities - and 
whether these might benefit CKD-patients. We aimed to map the intersection(s) of 
nephrology and wearable sensor technology to help technologists understand
medical aspects, and clinicians to understand technological possibilities that
are available (or soon will become so). Areas covered: A structured literature
search on main comorbidities and complications CKD patients suffer from, was used
to steer mini-reviews on wearable sensor technologies clustered around 3 themes
being: Cardiovascular-related, diabetes-related and physical fitness/frailty.
This review excludes wearable dialysis - although also strongly enabled by
miniaturization - because that highly important theme deserves separate in-depth 
reviewing. Expert commentary: Continuous progress in integrated electronics
miniaturization enormously lowered price, size, weight and energy consumption of 
electronic sensors, processing power, memory and wireless connectivity. These
combined factors boost opportunities for wearable medical sensors. Such devices
can be regarded as enablers for: Remote monitoring, influencing human behaviour
(exercise, dietary), enhanced home care, remote consults, patient education and
peer networks. However, to make wearable medical devices succeed, the challenge
to fit them into health care structures will be dominant over the challenge to
realize the bare technologies themselves.

DOI: 10.1080/17434440.2017.1342533 
PMID: 28612635  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2017 Jul 7;12(7):1100-1108. doi: 10.2215/CJN.12131116.
Epub 2017 Jun 2.

Factors Associated with Frailty and Its Trajectory among Patients on
Hemodialysis.

Johansen KL(1)(2)(3), Dalrymple LS(4), Delgado C(5)(2), Chertow GM(6), Segal
MR(3), Chiang J(2)(7), Grimes B(3), Kaysen GA(8)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Nephrology and Kirsten.johansen@ucsf.edu.
(2)Nephrology and Endocrinology Sections, San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical 
Center, San Francisco, California.
(3)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California, San
Francisco, California.
(4)Fresenius Medical Care North America, Waltham, Massachusetts.
(5)Divisions of Nephrology and.
(6)Division of Nephrology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California; and.
(7)Endocrinology and.
(8)Division of Nephrology and.
(9)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, University of California,
Davis, California.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Frailty is common among patients on hemodialysis and
associated with adverse outcomes. However, little is known about changes in
frailty over time and the factors associated with those changes.
DESIGN, SETTING, PARTICIPANTS, & MEASUREMENTS: To address these questions, we
examined 762 participants in the A Cohort to Investigate the Value of
Exercise/Analyses Designed to Investigate the Paradox of Obesity and Survival in 
ESRD cohort study, among whom frailty was assessed at baseline and 12 and 24
months. We used ordinal generalized estimating equations analyses and modeled
frailty (on a scale from zero to five possible components) and death during
follow-up.
RESULTS: The mean frailty score at baseline was 1.9, and the distribution of
frailty scores was similar at each evaluation. However, most participants' scores
changed, with patients improving almost as often as worsening (overall change,
0.2 points per year; 95% confidence interval, 0.1 to 0.3). Hispanic ethnicity
(0.6 points per year; 95% confidence interval, 0.0 to 1.1) and diabetes (0.7
points per year; 95% confidence interval, 0.3 to 1.0) were associated with higher
frailty scores and higher serum albumin concentration with lower frailty scores
(-1.1 points per g/dl; 95% confidence interval, -1.5 to -0.7). In addition,
patients whose serum albumin increased over time were less likely to become
frail, with each 1-g/dl increase in albumin associated with a 0.4-point reduction
in frailty score (95% confidence interval, -0.80 to -0.05). To examine the
underpinnings of the association between serum albumin and frailty, we included
serum IL-6, normalized protein catabolic rate, and patient self-report of
hospitalization within the last year in a second model. Higher IL-6 and
hospitalization were statistically significantly associated with worse frailty at
any point and worsening frailty over time, whereas normalized protein catabolic
rate was not independently associated with frailty.
CONCLUSIONS: There was substantial year to year variability in frailty scores,
with approximately equal numbers of patients improving and worsening. Markers of 
inflammation and hospitalization were independently associated with worsening
frailty. Studies should examine whether interventions to address inflammation or 
posthospitalization rehabilitation can improve the trajectory of frailty.

Copyright © 2017 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.2215/CJN.12131116 
PMCID: PMC5498360
PMID: 28576906  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Clin Transplant. 2017 Aug;31(8). doi: 10.1111/ctr.13020. Epub 2017 Jul 10.

Prehabilitation for kidney transplant candidates: Is it time?

Cheng XS(1), Myers JN(2)(3), Chertow GM(1), Rabkin R(1)(3), Chan KN(2), Chen
Y(3), Tan JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Stanford University, Palo
Alto, CA, USA.
(2)Division of Cardiology, Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo
Alto, CA, USA.
(3)Research Service, Veterans Administration Health Care System, Palo Alto, CA,
USA.

Many patients become frail with diminished cardiorespiratory fitness while
awaiting kidney transplantation. Frailty and poor fitness powerfully predict
mortality, transplant graft survival, and healthcare utilization after kidney
transplantation. Efforts to intervene with post-transplant physical therapy have 
been met with limited success, in large part due to high study dropout. We
reviewed the literature on chronic kidney disease and exercise to propose a
clinical framework for physical therapy interventions to improve fitness,
scheduled for before the transplant. This framework may lead to better patient
retention and compliance, and thus demonstrate better efficacy in mitigating the 
effects of frailty and poor fitness after kidney transplantation.

© 2017 The Authors. Clinical Transplantation published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ctr.13020 
PMID: 28564126  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Frailty Aging. 2017;6(2):103-106. doi: 10.14283/jfa.2017.14.

Frailty in End-Stage Renal Disease Patients under Dialysis and Its Association
with Clinical and Biochemical Markers.

Poveda V(1), Filgueiras M, Miranda V, Santos-Silva A, Paúl C, Costa E.

Author information: 
(1)Elísio Costa, Laboratório de Bioquímica, Departamento de Ciências Biológicas, 
Universidade do Porto, Rua de Jorge Viterbo Ferreira, 228, 4050-313 Porto,
Portugal, Email: emcosta@ff.up.pt.

Frailty is a common complication in elderly patients with end-stage renal disease
(ESRD) under dialysis, which is a strong risk factor for low quality of life,
morbidity, and mortality. In this work, we aimed to evaluate the prevalence of
frailty in a group of Portuguese ESRD patients, and its association with
socio-demographic, clinical and biochemical markers. We performed a
cross-sectional study with 83 ESRD patients (44 males and 39 females, 64.3
[±14.6] years old) on regular dialysis. The classification of the ESRD patients
as robust, pre-frail and frail was performed using the FRAIL questionnaire.
Social support, data about sociodemographic and comorbidities, and
haematological, iron status, dialysis adequacy, nutritional and inflammatory
markers were also evaluated. Our results confirmed that frailty is a highly
prevalent condition in ESRD patients, particularly in female patients. An
association between FRAIL score and increased depressive symptoms, presence of
hypertension and decrease nutritional status was also found.

DOI: 10.14283/jfa.2017.14 
PMID: 28555712  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: none


146. J Frailty Aging. 2017;6(2):72-75. doi: 10.14283/jfa.2017.5.

Can We Predict Morbidity and Mortality of Patients Aged 75 Years and Older
Undergoing Cystectomy?

Atallah F(1), Letocart P, Malavaud B, Ahmad M, Mazerolles M, Minville V.

Author information: 
(1)Fouad Atallah, MD, Department of anesthesiology and Intensive Care Medicine,
University Hospitals of Toulouse, France, email: atallah.f@chu-toulouse.fr.

Radical cystectomy is associated with a high postoperative mortality and
morbidity in older patients. We aimed to define the predictive value of
comorbidity scores and determine the prognostic factors of postoperative
complications. Preoperative associated morbidities were collected and graded
according to the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) score system, the
Adult Comorbidity Evaluation (ACE) scale and the Charlson comorbidity index.
Surgical complications were graded according to Clavien classification. Early and
late complications were recorded. Data are from 49 consecutive patients aged ≥ 75
years who had an open surgery for bladder cancer. The most commonly associated
conditions were smoking, renal insufficiency, and arterial hypertension.
Incidence of early and late complications was 49% and 16%, respectively. Four and
25 death events occurred during the early and late follow-up, respectively. The
incidence of morbidity and mortality were not related to ASA, ACE or Charlson
scores. Preoperative malnutrition, renal insufficiency, higher need of
perioperative blood transfusions, and prolonged ileus were identified as risk
factors of postoperative morbidity. Late complications seemed related to low
weight.

DOI: 10.14283/jfa.2017.5 
PMID: 28555706  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None


147. J Ren Care. 2017 Sep;43(3):163-174. doi: 10.1111/jorc.12205. Epub 2017 May 23.

Biomarkers associated with mortality in patients undergoing dialysis.

Rebollo Rubio A(1), Morales Asencio JM(2), Pons Raventos ME(3).

Author information: 
(1)Nephrology Service, Carlos Haya Regional University Hospital, Malaga, Spain.
(2)Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Malaga, Malaga, Spain.
(3)Fresenius Medical Care Services Andalusia, Antequera Clinic, Andalusia,
Alabama, USA.

BACKGROUND: Survival for patients commencing renal replacement therapy is around 
90% in the first year and 83% at two years after starting dialysis. The factors
that appear to predict mortality are comorbidity and frailty associated with
kidney disease, glomerular filtration rate, age and biochemical factors.
OBJECTIVES: To analyse the condition of patients starting renal replacement
therapy, based on biomarkers commonly used in clinical practice and their
association with mortality, measured 6 and 12 months after initiating replacement
therapy.
METHODS: A one-year prospective follow-up study with 189 patients.
Sociodemographic variables, aetiology of renal disease, comorbidities, prior
nephrology service monitoring, prior renal transplantation and biochemical
parameters at the time of initiating replacement therapy were analysed.
RESULTS: The overall percentage of death during the one-year follow-up was 6.87%,
with 64% of deaths occurring during the first six months. The only variable
independently associated with mortality was low albumin levels.
CONCLUSION: Although most patients in this centre are monitored by a nephrologist
prior to starting replacement therapy, many nevertheless fail to achieve the
biochemical targets recommended. One such parameter is albumin, which proved at
the start of replacement therapy to be an independent predictor of mortality.
Findings of this study show the need to intervene on certain biochemical
parameters during the pre-dialysis stage and at the start of dialysis, in order
to improve survival in this group of patients.

© 2017 European Dialysis and Transplant Nurses Association/European Renal Care
Association.

DOI: 10.1111/jorc.12205 
PMID: 28544527  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


148. BMC Nephrol. 2017 May 22;18(1):166. doi: 10.1186/s12882-017-0574-x.

Periodontitis and early mortality among adults treated with hemodialysis: a
multinational propensity-matched cohort study.

Ruospo M(1)(2), Palmer SC(3), Wong G(4), Craig JC(4), Petruzzi M(5), De
Benedittis M(5), Ford P(6), Johnson DW(6)(7), Tonelli M(8), Natale P(1),
Saglimbene V(1)(4), Pellegrini F(9), Celia E(1), Gelfman R(1), Leal MR(1), Torok 
M(1), Stroumza P(1), Bednarek-Skublewska A(1)(10), Dulawa J(1)(11), Frantzen
L(1), Del Castillo D(1), Schon S(1), Bernat AG(1), Hegbrant J(1), Wollheim C(1), 
Gargano L(1), Bots CP(12), Strippoli GF(13)(14)(15)(16); ORALD Investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Diaverum Medical Scientific Office, Lund, Sweden.
(2)Amedeo Avogadro University of Eastern Piedmont, Novara, Italy.
(3)University of Otago Christchurch, Christchurch, New Zealand.
(4)University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.
(5)Department of Emergency and Organ Transplantation, University of Bari, Piazza 
Giulio Cesare, 70124, Bari, Italy.
(6)University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.
(7)Translational Research Institute, Brisbane, Australia.
(8)University of Calgary, Calgary, Canada.
(9)Global Medical Biogen Idec, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(10)Medical University of Lublin, Lublin, Poland.
(11)SHS, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland.
(12)Academic Centre for Dentistry Amsterdam (ACTA), Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(13)Diaverum Medical Scientific Office, Lund, Sweden. gfmstrippoli@gmail.com.
(14)University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia. gfmstrippoli@gmail.com.
(15)Department of Emergency and Organ Transplantation, University of Bari, Piazza
Giulio Cesare, 70124, Bari, Italy. gfmstrippoli@gmail.com.
(16)Diaverum Academy, Lund, Sweden. gfmstrippoli@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Periodontitis is associated with cardiovascular mortality in the
general population and adults with chronic diseases. However, it is unclear
whether periodontitis predicts survival in the setting of kidney failure.
METHODS: ORAL-D was a propensity matched analysis in 3338 dentate adults with
end-stage kidney disease treated in a hemodialysis network in Europe and South
America designed to examine the association between periodontitis and all-cause
and cardiovascular-related mortality in people on long-term hemodialysis.
Participants were matched 1:1 on their propensity score for moderate to severe
periodontitis assessed using the World Health Organization Community Periodontal 
Index. A random-effects Cox proportional hazards model was fitted with shared
frailty to account for clustering of mortality risk within countries.
RESULTS: Among the 3338 dentate participants, 1355 (40.6%) had moderate to severe
periodontitis at baseline. After using propensity score methods to generate a
matched cohort of participants with periodontitis similar to those with none or
mild periodontal disease, moderate to severe periodontitis was associated with a 
lower risk of all-cause (9.1 versus 13.0 per 100 person years, hazard ratio 0.74,
95% confidence interval 0.61 to 0.90) and cardiovascular (4.3 versus 6.9 per 100 
person years, hazard ratio 0.67, 0.51 to 0.88) mortality. These associations were
not changed substantially when participants were limited to those with 12 or more
natural teeth and when accounting for competing causes of cardiovascular death.
CONCLUSION: In contrast to the general population, periodontitis does not appear 
to be associated with an increased risk of early death in adults treated with
hemodialysis.

DOI: 10.1186/s12882-017-0574-x 
PMCID: PMC5440912
PMID: 28532432  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Biomed Res Int. 2017;2017:2726369. doi: 10.1155/2017/2726369. Epub 2017 Apr 19.

Cognitive Impairment in Chronic Kidney Disease: Vascular Milieu and the Potential
Therapeutic Role of Exercise.

Bronas UG(1), Puzantian H(1), Hannan M(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Nursing, Department of Biobehavioral Health Science, University of 
Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is considered a model of accelerated aging. More
specifically, CKD leads to reduced physical functioning and increased frailty,
increased vascular dysfunction, vascular calcification and arterial stiffness,
high levels of systemic inflammation, and oxidative stress, as well as increased 
cognitive impairment. Increasing evidence suggests that the cognitive impairment 
associated with CKD may be related to cerebral small vessel disease and overall
impairment in white matter integrity. The triad of poor physical function,
vascular dysfunction, and cognitive impairment places patients living with CKD at
an increased risk for loss of independence, poor health-related quality of life, 
morbidity, and mortality. The purpose of this review is to discuss the available 
evidence of cerebrovascular-renal axis and its interconnection with early and
accelerated cognitive impairment in patients with CKD and the plausible role of
exercise as a therapeutic modality. Understanding the cerebrovascular-renal axis 
pathophysiological link and its interconnection with physical function is
important for clinicians in order to minimize the risk of loss of independence
and improve quality of life in patients with CKD.

DOI: 10.1155/2017/2726369 
PMCID: PMC5414492
PMID: 28503567  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


150. PLoS One. 2017 May 3;12(5):e0176814. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0176814.
eCollection 2017.

Effect of dialysis modality on frailty phenotype, disability, and health-related 
quality of life in maintenance dialysis patients.

Kang SH(1), Do JY(1), Lee SY(2), Kim JC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, Yeungnam University
Hospital, Daegu, Republic of Korea.
(2)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, CHA Bundang Medical
Center, CHA University School of Medicine, Seongnam, Republic of Korea.
(3)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, CHA Gumi Medical
Center, CHA University, Gumi, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: Health-related quality of life (HRQoL) surveys are needed to evaluate
regional and ethnic specificies. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the
differences in HRQoL, frailty, and disability according to dialysis modality in
the Korean population.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We enrolled relatively stable maintenance dialysis
patients. A total of 1,616 patients were recruited into our study. The
demographic and laboratory data collected at enrollment included age, sex,
comorbidities, frailty, disability, and HRQoL scales.
RESULTS: A total of 1,250 and 366 participants underwent hemodialysis (HD) and
peritoneal dialysis (PD), respectively. The numbers of participants with
pre-frailty and frailty were 578 (46.2%) and 422 (33.8%) in HD patients, and 165 
(45.1%) and 137 (37.4%) in PD patients, respectively (P = 0.349). Participants
with a disability included 195 (15.6%) HD patients and 109 (29.8%) PD patients (P
< 0.001). On multivariate analysis, the mean physical component scale (PCS) and
mental component scale (MCS), symptom/problems, and sleep scores were higher in
HD patients than in PD patients. Cox regression analyses showed that an increased
PCS in both HD and PD patients was positively associated with patient survival
and first hospitalization-free survival. An increased MCS in both HD and PD
patients was positively associated with first hospitalization-free survival only.
CONCLUSION: There was no significant difference in frailty between patients
treated with the two dialysis modalities; however, disability was more common in 
PD patients than in HD patients. The MCS and PCS were more favorable in HD
patients than in PD patients. Symptom/problems, sleep, quality of social
interaction, and social support were more favorable in HD patients than in PD
patients; however, patient satisfaction and dialysis staff encouragement were
more favorable in PD patients than in HD patients.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0176814 
PMCID: PMC5415130
PMID: 28467472  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


151. BMC Nephrol. 2017 May 2;18(1):148. doi: 10.1186/s12882-017-0558-x.

Frailty in end-stage renal disease: comparing patient, caregiver, and clinician
perspectives.

Clark DA(1), Khan U(2), Kiberd BA(1), Turner CC(3), Dixon A(3), Landry D(2),
Moffatt HC(4), Moorhouse PA(4), Tennankore KK(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Dalhousie University, 5070 Dickson Building, 5820
University Avenue, Halifax, B3H 2Y9, NS, Canada.
(2)Nova Scotia Health Authority, Halifax, NS, Canada.
(3)Division of Internal Medicine, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada.
(4)Division of Geriatric Medicine, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada.
(5)Division of Nephrology, Dalhousie University, 5070 Dickson Building, 5820
University Avenue, Halifax, B3H 2Y9, NS, Canada. ktennankore@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Frailty is associated with poor outcomes for patients on dialysis and
is traditionally measured using tools that assess physical impairment. Alternate 
measurement tools highlight cognitive and functional domains, requiring
clinician, patient, and/or caregiver input. In this study, we compared frailty
measures for incident dialysis patients that incorporate patient, clinician, and 
caregiver perspectives with an aim to contrast the measured prevalence of frailty
using tools derived from different conceptual frameworks.
METHODS: A prospective cohort study of incident dialysis patients was conducted
between February 2014 and June 2015. Frailty was assessed at dialysis onset
using: 1) modified definition of Fried Phenotype (Dialysis Morbidity Mortality
Study definition, DMMS); 2) Clinical Frailty Scale (CFS); 3) Frailty Assessment
Care Planning Tool (provides CFS grading, FACT-CFS); and 4) Frailty Index (FI).
Measures were compared via correlation and sensitivity/specificity analyses.
RESULTS: A total of 98 patients participated (mean age of 61 ± 14 years).
Participants were primarily Caucasian (91%), male (58%), and the majority started
on hemodialysis (83%). The median score for both the CFS and FACT-CFS was 4
(interquartile range of 3-5). The mean FI score was 0.31 (standard
deviation ± 0.16). The DMMS identified 78% of patients as frail. The FACT-CFS
demonstrated highest correlation (r = 0.71) with the FI, while the DMMS was most 
sensitive (97%, 100%) and a CFS ≥ 5 most specific (100%, 77%) at corresponding FI
cutoff values (>0.21, >0.45).
CONCLUSIONS: Frailty assessments of incident dialysis patients that include
clinician, caregiver and patient perspectives have moderate to strong correlation
with the FI. At specified FI cutoff values, the FACT-CFS and DMMS are highly
sensitive measures of frailty. The CFS and FACT-CFS may represent viable
alternative screening tools in dialysis patients.

DOI: 10.1186/s12882-017-0558-x 
PMCID: PMC5412047
PMID: 28464924  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Arthroplasty. 2017 Sep;32(9S):S177-S182. doi: 10.1016/j.arth.2017.03.046. Epub 
2017 Mar 29.

Modified Frailty Index Is an Effective Risk Assessment Tool in Primary Total Knee
Arthroplasty.

Runner RP(1), Bellamy JL(1), Vu CCL(1), Erens GA(1), Schenker ML(2), Guild GN
3rd(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia.
(2)Department of Orthopaedics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia; Department of Orthopaedics, Grady Memorial Hospital, Atlanta, Georgia.

BACKGROUND: "Frailty" is a marker of physiological decline of multiple organ
systems, and the frailty index identifies patients who are more susceptible to
postoperative complications. The purpose of this study is to validate the
modified frailty index (MFI) as a predictor of postoperative complications,
reoperations, and readmissions in patients who underwent primary total knee
arthroplasty (TKA).
METHODS: The American College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement
Program database from 2005 to 2014 was queried by the Current Procedural
Terminology code for primary TKA (27447). A previously described MFI was used to 
summate 11 variables in 5 organ systems. Bivariate analysis was performed for
postoperative complications. A multiple logistic regression model was used to
determine the relationship between MFI, American Society of Anesthesiologists
score, and 30-day reoperation, controlling for age, gender, and body mass index.
RESULTS: A total of 90,260 patients underwent primary TKA during the study
period. As MFI score increased, 30-day mortality significantly increased (P <
.001). In addition, significantly higher rates of postoperative complications
(all P < .001) were observed with increasing MFI: infection, wound, cardiac,
pulmonary, and renal complications; and any occurrence. More frail patients also 
had increasing odds of adverse hospital discharge disposition, reoperation, and
readmission (all P < .001). Length of hospital stay increased from 3.10 to 5.16
days (P < .001), while length of intensive care unit stay increased from 3.47 to 
5.07 days (P < .001) between MFI score 0 and ≥0.36. MFI predicts 30-day
reoperation with an adjusted odds ratio of 3.32 (95% confidence interval,
1.36-8.11; P < .001). Comparatively, MFI was a stronger predictor of reoperation 
compared with American Society of Anesthesiologists score and age with adjustment
for gender and body mass index.
CONCLUSION: Utilization of the MFI is a valid method in predicting postoperative 
complications, reoperations, and readmissions in patients undergoing primary TKA 
and can provide an effective and robust risk assessment tool to appropriately
counsel patients and aid in preoperative optimization.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.arth.2017.03.046 
PMID: 28442185  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Am J Kidney Dis. 2017 Jun;69(6):837-852. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2017.01.051. Epub
2017 Apr 18.

Exercise and CKD: Skeletal Muscle Dysfunction and Practical Application of
Exercise to Prevent and Treat Physical Impairments in CKD.

Roshanravan B(1), Gamboa J(2), Wilund K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, University of Washington
Kidney Research Institute, Seattle, WA. Electronic address: broshanr@uw.edu.
(2)Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN.
(3)Department of Kinesiology and Community Health, University of Illinois,
Urbana, IL.

Patients with chronic kidney disease experience substantial loss of muscle mass, 
weakness, and poor physical performance. As kidney disease progresses, skeletal
muscle dysfunction forms a common pathway for mobility limitation, loss of
functional independence, and vulnerability to disease complications. Screening
for those at high risk for mobility disability by self-reported and objective
measures of function is an essential first step in developing an
interdisciplinary approach to treatment that includes rehabilitative therapies
and counseling on physical activity. Exercise has beneficial effects on systemic 
inflammation, muscle, and physical performance in chronic kidney disease. Kidney 
health providers need to identify patient and care delivery barriers to exercise 
in order to effectively counsel patients on physical activity. A thorough medical
evaluation and assessment of baseline function using self-reported and objective 
function assessment is essential to guide an effective individualized exercise
prescription to prevent function decline in persons with kidney disease. This
review focuses on the impact of kidney disease on skeletal muscle dysfunction in 
the context of the disablement process and reviews screening and treatment
strategies that kidney health professionals can use in clinical practice to
prevent functional decline and disability.

Copyright © 2017 National Kidney Foundation, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2017.01.051 
PMCID: PMC5441955
PMID: 28427790  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Semin Nephrol. 2017 Mar;37(2):159-172. doi: 10.1016/j.semnephrol.2016.12.006.

Prehabilitation for the Frail Patient Approaching ESRD.

Sheshadri A(1), Johansen KL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Nephrology Section, San Francisco VA Medical Center and University of
California, San Francisco, CA.
(2)Nephrology Section, San Francisco VA Medical Center and University of
California, San Francisco, CA. Electronic address: Kirsten.johansen@ucsf.edu.

Frailty is a distinct phenotype that is highly prevalent in chronic kidney
disease (CKD) and appears to be more prevalent with decreasing glomerular
filtration rate. Exercise training or intervention to increase physical activity 
may ameliorate poor physical functioning and frailty, and even may improve
survival in patients with CKD. Although exercise interventions improve outcomes
across the spectrum of CKD, including patients treated with dialysis, patients
treated with dialysis face barriers to exercise that patients with predialysis
CKD do not. Rehabilitation at earlier stages of CKD (or prehabilitation before
dialysis) might be more beneficial than not addressing the decreasing physical
functioning and low physical activity until patients are receiving dialysis. This
review summarizes available literature on frailty in the CKD and end-stage renal 
disease population, including exercise interventions and the limited evidence for
prehabilitation as a strategy.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semnephrol.2016.12.006 
PMCID: PMC5393359
PMID: 28410650  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Geriatr Gerontol Int. 2017 Apr;17(4):669-670. doi: 10.1111/ggi.12904.

Chronic kidney disease, physical frailty and cognitive impairment.

Kawada T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hygiene and Public Health, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan.

Comment in
    Geriatr Gerontol Int. 2017 Apr;17 (4):670-671.

Comment on
    J Vis Exp. 2008 Dec 05;(22):null.

DOI: 10.1111/ggi.12904 
PMID: 28405972  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Geriatr Gerontol Int. 2017 Apr;17(4):670-671. doi: 10.1111/ggi.12927.

Response to the letter of Dr Tomoyuki Kawada, "Chronic kidney disease, physical
frailty and cognitive impairment".

Ruan Q(1), Yu Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Geriatrics and Gerontology, Shanghai Key Laboratory of
Clinical Geriatrics, Department of Geriatrics, Huadong Hospital, and Research
Center of Aging and Medicine, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University,
Shanghai, China.

Comment on
    Geriatr Gerontol Int. 2017 Apr;17 (4):669-670.

DOI: 10.1111/ggi.12927 
PMID: 28405971  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Drugs Aging. 2017 Jun;34(6):445-452. doi: 10.1007/s40266-017-0460-z.

Clinical Relevance of Differences in Glomerular Filtration Rate Estimations in
Frail Older People by Creatinine- vs. Cystatin C-Based Formulae.

Jacobs A(1)(2)(3)(4), Benraad C(5)(6), Wetzels J(7), Rikkert MO(5)(8), Kramers
C(9)(10)(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatrics, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
jacobs.anne@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Geriatric Psychiatry, Pro Persona Mental Health Care,
Nijmegen/Arnhem, The Netherlands. jacobs.anne@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Pharmacology-Toxicology, Radboud University Medical Center,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. jacobs.anne@gmail.com.
(4)Heilige Geeststraat 14, 5664 AV, Geldrop, The Netherlands.
jacobs.anne@gmail.com.
(5)Department of Geriatrics, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Geriatric Psychiatry, Pro Persona Mental Health Care,
Nijmegen/Arnhem, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Nephrology, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(8)Radboudumc Alzheimer Centre, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and
Behavior, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(9)Department of Internal Medicine, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(10)Department of Pharmacology-Toxicology, Radboud University Medical Center,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(11)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, Canisius Wilhelmina Hospital, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: The risk of incorrect medication dosing is high in frail older
people. Therefore, accurate assessment of the glomerular filtration rate is
important.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to compare the estimated glomerular
filtration rate using creatinine- and cystatin C-based formulae, the Chronic
Kidney Disease Epidemiology Collaboration (CKD-EPI) equations, in frail older
people. We hypothesized that frailty determines the difference between the
creatinine- and cystatin C-based formulae.
METHODS: The mean difference between CKD-EPI creatinine and cystatin C was
determined using (cross-sectional) data of 55 patients (mean age 73 years)
admitted to a psychiatric ward for older adults. The level of agreement of these 
estimations was assessed by a Bland-Altman analysis. In all patients, the
Rockwood's Frailty Index was derived and correlated with the mean difference
between CKD-EPI creatinine and cystatin C.
RESULTS: The mean difference between CKD-EPI creatinine (mean
71.2 mL/min/1.73 m2) and CKD-EPI cystatin C (mean 57.6 mL/min/1.73 m2) was
13.6 mL/min/1.73 m2 (p < 0.0001). The two standard deviation limit in the
Bland-Altman plot was large (43.2 mL/min/1.73 m2), which represents a low level
of agreement. The Frailty Index did not correlate with the mean difference
between the creatinine- and cystatin C-based glomerular filtration rate (Pearson 
correlation coefficient 0.182, p = 0.184).
CONCLUSIONS: There was a significant gap between a creatinine- and cystatin
C-based estimation of glomerular filtration rate, irrespective of frailty. The
range of differences between the commonly used estimated glomerular filtration
rate formulae might result in clinically relevant differences in drug
prescription and differences in chronic kidney disease staging.

DOI: 10.1007/s40266-017-0460-z 
PMID: 28405944  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Eur J Nutr. 2018 Jun;57(4):1639-1650. doi: 10.1007/s00394-017-1449-4. Epub 2017
Apr 12.

Higher dietary acid load is associated with a higher prevalence of frailty,
particularly slowness/weakness and low physical activity, in elderly Japanese
women.

Kataya Y(1), Murakami K(2), Kobayashi S(3), Suga H(4), Sasaki S(3);
Three-generation Study of Women on Diets and Health Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, School of Human Cultures, University of Shiga
Prefecture, Shiga, Japan.
(2)Interfaculty Initiative in Information Studies, University of Tokyo, Tokyo,
113 0033, Japan. kenmrkm@m.u-tokyo.ac.jp.
(3)Department of Social and Preventive Epidemiology, School of Public Health,
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Social and Preventive Epidemiology, Graduated School of
Medicine, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Epidemiologic evidence on the potential effects of dietary acid load
on frailty is lacking. This cross-sectional study examined the association
between dietary acid load and frailty.
METHODS: This study was based on self-reported data obtained from 2176 Japanese
women aged 65-94 years. Dietary acid load was characterized as potential renal
acid load (PRAL) and net endogenous acid production (NEAP), based on information 
on nutrient intake, obtained from a validated brief diet history questionnaire.
Frailty score (0-5) was defined as the sum of slowness/weakness (two points),
exhaustion (one point), low physical activity (one point), and unintentional
weight loss (one point). A score of ≥3 was classified as indicating frailty.
RESULTS: The prevalence of frailty was 17.9%. After adjustment for potential
confounding factors, higher PRAL and NEAP were associated with a higher
prevalence of frailty. Adjusted OR (95% CI) for frailty in the highest compared
to the lowest quintiles was 1.59 (1.08, 2.34) for PRAL (P for trend = 0.048) and 
1.42 (0.98, 2.06) for NEAP (P for trend = 0.03). PRAL and NEAP also showed
positive associations with the prevalence of slowness/weakness and low physical
activity (all P for trend ≤0.03). PRAL (but not NEAP) was positively associated
with the prevalence of exhaustion (P for trend = 0.04). There was no association 
for unintentional weight loss.
CONCLUSIONS: Dietary acid load was positively associated with the prevalence of
frailty, particularly slowness/weakness and low physical activity, in elderly
Japanese women.

DOI: 10.1007/s00394-017-1449-4 
PMID: 28405820  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2017 Oct 12;72(11):1554-1560. doi:
10.1093/gerona/glx039.

Kidney Function Estimated From Cystatin C, But Not Creatinine, Is Related to
Objective Tests of Physical Performance in Community-Dwelling Older Adults.

Canney M(1)(2), Sexton DJ(1)(2), O'Connell MDL(1), Kenny RA(1), Little MA(2),
O'Seaghdha CM(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Irish Longitudinal Study on Ageing, Department of Medical Gerontology,
Trinity College Dublin, Ireland.
(2)Trinity Health Kidney Centre, Trinity Centre for Health Sciences, Tallaght
Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
(3)Department of Renal Medicine, Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.

Background: The burden of chronic kidney disease is highest among older adults
but the significance of a diminished level of kidney function in this
heterogeneous population is poorly understood. We sought to examine the
relationship between estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) and objective
physical performance in older adults.
Methods: Cross-sectional analysis of 4,562 participants from The Irish
Longitudinal Study on Ageing, a national cohort of community-dwelling adults aged
≥50 years. We used multivariable linear or quantile regression to model the
association between categories of cystatin C (eGFRcys) or creatinine eGFR
(eGFRcr) and the following outcomes: gait speed, timed-up-and-go (TUG) and grip
strength. Relationships were further explored using natural eGFR splines. We
examined effect modification by age in the relationship between eGFR and gait
speed.
Results: Mean (SD) age was 61.8 (8.3) years, 53.6% were female and median (IQR)
eGFRcys was 82 (70-94) mL/min/1.73m2. In multivariable-adjusted models,
participants in the lowest eGFRcys category (< 45 mL/min/1.73m2) had 3.32 cm/s
(95% confidence interval [95%CI] 0.02-6.62) slower mean gait speed, 1.32 kg
(95%CI 0.20-2.44) lower mean grip strength, and 0.31 seconds (95% CI -0.04 to
0.65) longer median TUG versus the reference group (eGFRcys ≥ 90 mL/min/1.73m2). 
The relationship between eGFRcys and outcomes appeared linear but varied by age. 
The association between eGFRcr and outcomes tended towards a U-shape.
Conclusions: Cystatin C eGFR was linearly related to poorer physical performance 
beyond middle age among community-dwelling adults. The non-linear relationships
observed with eGFRcr underscore the limitations of creatinine as a predictor of
frailty outcomes in older individuals.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The
Gerontological Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, please
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/gerona/glx039 
PMID: 28329158  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


160. J Geriatr Oncol. 2017 Jul;8(4):289-295. doi: 10.1016/j.jgo.2017.02.011. Epub 2017
Mar 11.

Follow-up of elderly patients with urogenital cancers: Evaluation of geriatric
care needs and related actions.

Monfardini S(1), Morlino S(2), Valdagni R(3), Catanzaro M(4), Tafa A(5),
Bortolato B(6), Petralia G(7), Bonetto E(8), Villa E(9), Picozzi S(10), Locatelli
MC(11), Galetti G(12), Millul A(13), Albanese Y(13), Bianchi E(13), Panzarino
C(12), Gerardi F(12), Beghi E(13).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Palazzolo Fondazione Don Gnocchi, Milano, Italy. Electronic address: 
smonfardini@dongnocchi.it.
(2)Radioterapia, Istituto Nazionale Tumori Milano, Italy.
(3)Dipartimento di Oncologia ed Emato-Oncologia, Università degli Studi di
Milano, Italy.
(4)Chirurgia Urologica Istituto Nazionale Tumori Milano, Italy.
(5)Clinica Urologica Università degli Studi Milano, Italy.
(6)Radioterapia Ospedale Niguarda, Milano, Italy.
(7)Urologia Ospedale Niguarda, Milano, Italy.
(8)Radioterapia Ospedale S. Gerardo, Monza, Italy.
(9)Radioterapia Istituto Clinico Humanitas, Rozzano, Italy.
(10)Urologia Ospedale Policlinico San Donato, San Donato Milanese, Italy.
(11)Oncologia Medica, Ospedale San Carlo, Milano, Italy.
(12)Istituto Palazzolo Fondazione Don Gnocchi, Milano, Italy.
(13)IRCCS Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri, Milano, Italy.

OBJECTIVES: To investigate a comprehensive geriatric assessment (CGA) with
subsequent investigation of healthcare patterns in older patients with urological
cancers undergoing initial surgery or radiotherapy, to verify the usefulness of
the incorporation of geriatric principles in future care plans.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: This is a prospective cohort study. From November 2011 to
March 2015, CGA was offered to all patients aged 70+ years treated with
radiotherapy or surgery at seven tertiary centers. Patients were classified as
fit, vulnerable, or frail according to Balducci's definition. CGA and follow-up
data were collected by two trained evaluators at 6 and 12months. The information 
collected was not available to the caring physicians during follow-up.
RESULTS: CGA was performed in 453 patients with prostate cancer (295), bladder
cancer (126), or kidney cancer (32). 40% of patients with prostate cancer were
fit, 47% vulnerable, and 13% frail. The corresponding values for renal cancer
were 25%, 40%, and 34%, and for bladder cancer, 21%, 42%, and 37%. During
follow-up, 60% of patients with cardiac diseases, 42% of those with
diabetes/other metabolic disorders, 35% of those with hypertension, and 35% of
those with respiratory diseases were followed by a specialist (for these
severe/extremely severe comorbidities). Of 16 patients with ADL impairment and 63
with IADL impairment, only 4 (25%) and 6 (10%), respectively, were referred to a 
rehabilitation service. Only one case was referred to a geriatrician.
CONCLUSIONS: Appropriate clinical care patterns are advisable to improve quality 
of survivorship in older patients with urological cancers.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jgo.2017.02.011 
PMID: 28292646  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Nephrology (Carlton). 2017 Apr;22(4):333-334. doi: 10.1111/nep.12961.

Self-reported frailty among end-stage renal disease patients: A potential
predictor of dialysis access outcomes.

Chao CT(1)(2)(3), Chiang CK(2)(4), Huang JW(3), Hung KY(3); COGENT study
group(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital Jinshan branch,
New Taipei City, Taiwan.
(2)Graduate Institute of Toxicology, National Taiwan University College of
Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine.
(4)Department of Integrative Diagnostics and Therapeutics, National Taiwan
University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)COhort of GEriatric Nephrology in NTUH.

DOI: 10.1111/nep.12961 
PMID: 28247523  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Internist (Berl). 2017 Apr;58(4):344-353. doi: 10.1007/s00108-017-0200-9.

[Multimorbidity management and the physician's daily clinical dilemma].

[Article in German]

Battegay E(1)(2)(3), Cheetham M(4)(5)(6), Holzer BM(4)(5)(6), Nowak A(4), Schmidt
D(4)(5)(6), Rampini S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Klinik und Poliklinik für Innere Medizin, UniversitätsSpital Zürich,
Rämistr. 100, 8091, Zürich, Schweiz. edouard.battegay@usz.ch.
(2)Kompetenzzentrum Multimorbidität, Universität Zürich, Zürich, Schweiz.
edouard.battegay@usz.ch.
(3)Forschungsschwerpunkt Dynamics of Healthy Aging, Universität Zürich, Zürich,
Schweiz. edouard.battegay@usz.ch.
(4)Klinik und Poliklinik für Innere Medizin, UniversitätsSpital Zürich,
Rämistr. 100, 8091, Zürich, Schweiz.
(5)Kompetenzzentrum Multimorbidität, Universität Zürich, Zürich, Schweiz.
(6)Forschungsschwerpunkt Dynamics of Healthy Aging, Universität Zürich, Zürich,
Schweiz.

About 20-25% of all persons and about 90% of all patients who are acutely
hospitalized in internal medicine departments have multiple acute or chronic
diseases. They are multimorbid. The encounter with multimorbid patients has
become the most common situation in the health care system. Theoretically,
multimorbidity results in an innumerable potential disease constellations. In
addition, the likelihood of interactions between diseases (disease-disease
interactions, DDI) and the complexity increases overproportionately with each
additional disease. However, multimorbidity often occurs in typical diadic,
triadic, or higher characteristic combinations, in "disease clusters", e. g.,
vascular risk factors, heart and lung diseases, Frailty and dementia, psychiatric
and somatic disorders. Such combinations lead to a worsening of the overall
prognosis. In addition, DDIs are often difficult to treat or are
life-threatening. Examples of DDIs include the following: anticoagulation and
simultaneous severe bleeding, pain treatment and hypertension or renal
insufficiency, depression and reduced medication adherence, chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease and depression, Frailty and neurodepressant drugs and frequent 
falls, and combined psychiatric and somatic disorders. Such DDIs are common.
Nevertheless, there are few studies and clinical guidelines that address these
issues. The care of multimorbid patients is, therefore, heavily reliant upon
guidelines developed mostly for single diseases. However, multimorbidity and
serious DDIs are usually not addressed in these. Clinical guidelines can thus
inadvertently jeopardize the safety of persons suffering from multiple diseases. 
In addition, stressful dilemmas arise for physicians encountering DDIs because of
difficult treatment decisions.

DOI: 10.1007/s00108-017-0200-9 
PMID: 28246687  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Arch Orthop Trauma Surg. 2017 Apr;137(4):507-515. doi: 10.1007/s00402-017-2646-6.
Epub 2017 Feb 23.

Complications during hospitalization and risk factors in elderly patients with
hip fracture following integrated orthogeriatric treatment.

Folbert EC(1), Hegeman JH(2), Gierveld R(3), van Netten JJ(4), Velde DV(2), Ten
Duis HJ(5), Slaets JP(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Trauma Surgery, Ziekenhuisgroep Twente, Almelo-Hengelo, The
Netherlands. e.folbert@zgt.nl.
(2)Department of Trauma Surgery, Ziekenhuisgroep Twente, Almelo-Hengelo, The
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Finance and Organization, Ziekenhuisgroep Twente,
Almelo-Hengelo, The Netherlands.
(4)ZGT Academy, Ziekenhuisgroep Twente, Almelo-Hengelo, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Surgery, University Medical Centre Groningen, Groningen, The
Netherlands.
(6)Department of Geriatric Medicine, University Medical Centre Groningen,
Goningen, Leydenacademy on Vitality and Aging, Leiden, The Netherlands.

INTRODUCTION: This study aimed to evaluate the incidence of complications in
elderly patients with a hip fracture following integrated orthogeriatric
treatment. To discover factors that might be adjusted, in order to improve
outcome in those patients, we examined the association between baseline patient
characteristics and a complicated course.
METHODS: We included patients aged 70 years and older with a hip fracture, who
were treated at the Centre for Geriatric Traumatology (CvGT) at Ziekenhuisgroep
Twente (ZGT) Almelo, the Netherlands between April 2011 and October 2013. Data
registration was carried out using the clinical pathways of the CvGT database.
Based on the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) score, patients were
divided into high-risk (HR, ASA 3 ≥, n = 341) and low-risk (LR, ASA 1-2, n = 111)
groups and compared on their recovery. Multivariate logistic regression was used 
to identify risk factors for a complicated course.
RESULTS: The analysis demonstrated that 49.6% (n = 224) of the patients
experienced a complicated course with an in-hospital mortality rate of 3.8%
(n = 17). In 57.5% (n = 196) of the HR patients, a complicated course was seen
compared to 25.2% (n = 28) of the LR patients. The most common complications in
both groups were the occurrence of delirium (HR 25.8% vs. LR 8.1%, p ≤ 0.001),
anemia (HR 19.4% vs. LR 6.3%, p = 0.001), catheter-associated urinary tract
infections (CAUTIs) (HR 10.6% vs. LR 7.2%, p = 0.301) and pneumonia (HR 10.9% vs.
LR 5.4%, p = 0.089). Independent risk factors for a complicated course were
increasing age (OR 1.04, 95% CI 1.01-1.07, p = 0.023), delirium risk VMS Frailty 
score (OR 1.57, 95% CI 1.04-2.37, p = 0.031) and ASA score ≥3 (OR 3.62, 95% CI
2.22-5.91, p ≤ 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: After integrated orthogeriatric treatment, a complicated course was 
seen in 49.6% of the patients with a hip fracture. The in-hospital mortality rate
was 3.8%. Important risk factors for a complicated course were increasing age,
poor medical condition and delirium risk VMS Frailty score. Awareness of risk
factors that affect the course during admission can be useful in optimizing care 
and outcomes. In the search for possible areas for improvement in care, targeted 
preventive measures to mitigate delirium, and healthcare-associated infections
(HAIs), such as CAUTIs and pneumonia are important.

DOI: 10.1007/s00402-017-2646-6 
PMID: 28233062  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Int Urol Nephrol. 2017 Nov;49(11):1989-1997. doi: 10.1007/s11255-017-1547-5. Epub
2017 Feb 22.

Prevalence of frailty in end-stage renal disease: a systematic review and
meta-analysis.

Kojima G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Japan Green Medical Centre, 10 Throgmorton Avenue, London, EC2N 2DL, UK.
gotarokojima@yahoo.co.jp.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study is to perform a systematic review and
meta-analysis on prevalence of frailty among patients with end-stage renal
disease (ESRD). ESRD is associated with malnutrition, chronic inflammation,
acidemia, impaired hormonal changes, and low physical activity, all of which can 
directly and indirectly contribute to the development of frailty. Coexistence of 
ESRD and frailty has been shown to increase risks of adverse health outcomes.
Given potential reversibility of frailty, it is important to examine frailty
status in this high-risk population.
METHODS: Three databases (EMBASE, Medline, and CINAHL) were systematically
searched for studies providing cross-sectional data of prevalence of frailty
defined by cardiovascular health study (CHS) criteria among ESRD patients.
Meta-analysis calculated pooled prevalence of frailty according to modifications 
of CHS criteria.
RESULTS: Of 837 studies identified through the systematic review, seven studies
were included. Three studies used both objectively measured and self-reported CHS
criteria, and two studies each used only either criteria. Pooled prevalence of
frailty was 36.8% (five studies: 95% CI = 29.9-44.1%, I 2 = 82.6%, p < 0.001) and
67.0% (five studies: 95% CI = 58.7-74.7%, I 2 = 96.5%, p < 0.001) according to
the objectively measured and self-reported CHS criteria, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: More than one-third of ESRD patients were frail based on the
objectively measured CHS criteria, and that prevalence of frailty almost doubled 
with the CHS criteria substituting self-reported physical function questionnaire 
score for objective measurements. Given substantial difference in prevalence of
frailty depending on the modifications to CHS criteria, this information should
be taken into account when evaluating frailty status among ESRD population.

DOI: 10.1007/s11255-017-1547-5 
PMID: 28229311  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens. 2017 May;26(3):219-228. doi:
10.1097/MNH.0000000000000318.

Clinical relevance of sarcopenia in chronic kidney disease.

Moorthi RN(1), Avin KG.

Author information: 
(1)aDivision of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Indiana University School of 
Medicine bDepartment of Physical Therapy, Indiana University, Indianapolis,
Indiana, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: In this article, we review sarcopenia in chronic kidney
disease (CKD). We aim to present how definitions of sarcopenia from the general
population may pertain to those with CKD, its assessment by clinicians and
emerging therapies for sarcopenia in CKD. For this review, we limit our
description and recommendations to patients with CKD who are not on dialysis.
RECENT FINDINGS: Poorer parameters of lean mass, strength and physical function
are associated with worsening patient-centered outcomes such as limiting
mobility, falls and mortality in CKD; however, the magnitude of these
associations are different in those with and without CKD. Sarcopenia in CKD is a 
balance between skeletal muscle regeneration and catabolism, which are both
altered in the uremic environment. Multiple pathways are involved in these
derangements, which are briefly reviewed. Differences between commonly used terms
cachexia, frailty, protein-energy wasting, dynapenia and sarcopenia are
described. Therapeutic options in predialysis CKD are not well studied;
therefore, we review exercise options and emerging pharmacological therapies.
SUMMARY: Sarcopenia, now with its own International Classification of Diseases,
10th Revision (ICD-10) code, is of importance clinically and should be accounted 
for in research studies in patients with CKD. Multiple therapies for sarcopenia
are in development and will hopefully be available for our patients in the
future.

DOI: 10.1097/MNH.0000000000000318 
PMCID: PMC5860815
PMID: 28198733  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


166. High Blood Press Cardiovasc Prev. 2017 Mar;24(1):1-11. doi:
10.1007/s40292-017-0185-4. Epub 2017 Feb 8.

Management of Hypertension in the Elderly and Frail Elderly.

Ferri C(1), Ferri L(2), Desideri G(3).

Author information: 
(1)MeSVA Department, Chair and School of Internal Medicine - San Salvatore
Hospital, Division of Internal Medicine and Nephrology - University of L'Aquila, 
Coppito, Italy. claudio.ferri@cc.univaq.it.
(2)Sant'Andrea Hospital, University of Rome Sapienza, Rome, Italy.
(3)MeSVA Department, Chair and School of Geriatric Medicine - Civil Hospital of
Avezzano, Division of Geriatric Medicine - University of L'Aquila, Coppito,
Italy.

An elevated systolic but not diastolic blood pressure level represents a common
finding in elderly patients and is associated with an increased risk for
developing coronary artery disease, cerebrovascular disease, peripheral artery
disease, progressive cognitive decline and renal failure. Although less
frequently, elderly patients manifest not only with systolic but also diastolic
hypertension. Also in this case, the elderly patient will present an increased
risk for developing hypertension-related abnormalities. Based on several trials
conducted in patients ≥65 years and one single trial in patients ≥80 years the
most recent European guidelines recommend antihypertensive treatment in elderly
hypertensive patients with a systolic blood pressure ≥60 mmHg, with a systolic
target between 140 and 150 mmHg. In fit elderly patients <80 years treatment may 
be considered at a systolic level ≥140 mmHg with a target SBP <140 mmHg if
treatment is well tolerated. Despite of the above, at least three issues related 
to antihypertensive drug treatment in aged individuals are still debated,
particularly after the publication of a recent large scale clinical trial that
included also 2.636 patients ≥75 years and a study in nursing home residents
≥80 years, i.e. the frailest oldest patients: (1) the blood pressure threshold at
which antihypertensive drug should be initiated, (2) the blood pressure targets
of the therapeutic intervention, and (3) the approach to frail elderly
hypertensive patients. This review will critically review the evidence available 
so far on these important issues as well as the position of current guidelines
and consensus statements.

DOI: 10.1007/s40292-017-0185-4 
PMID: 28181201  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Haematologica. 2017 May;102(5):910-921. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2016.162693. Epub
2017 Feb 2.

A concise revised Myeloma Comorbidity Index as a valid prognostic instrument in a
large cohort of 801 multiple myeloma patients.

Engelhardt M(1), Domm AS(2), Dold SM(2), Ihorst G(3), Reinhardt H(2), Zober A(2),
Hieke S(3)(4), Baayen C(4)(5), Müller SJ(2), Einsele H(6), Sonneveld P(7),
Landgren O(8), Schumacher M(4), Wäsch R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine I, Hematology, Oncology & Stem Cell Transplantation,
Medical Center - University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, Germany
monika.engelhardt@uniklinik-freiburg.de.
(2)Department of Medicine I, Hematology, Oncology & Stem Cell Transplantation,
Medical Center - University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, Germany.
(3)Clinical Trials Unit, Medical Center - University of Freiburg, Faculty of
Medicine, Germany.
(4)Center for Medical Biometry and Statistics, University of Freiburg, Faculty of
Medicine, Germany.
(5)Université de Nantes, UFR des Sciences Pharmaceutiques, Nantes Cedex, France.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine II, University Hospital, Würzburg, Germany.
(7)Department of Hematology, University Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(8)Myeloma Service, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.

With growing numbers of elderly multiple myeloma patients, reliable tools to
assess their vulnerability are required. The objective of the analysis herein was
to develop and validate an easy to use myeloma risk score (revised Myeloma
Comorbidity Index) that allows for risk prediction of overall survival and
progression-free survival differences in a large patient cohort. We conducted a
comprehensive comorbidity, frailty and disability evaluation in 801 consecutive
myeloma patients, including comorbidity risks obtained at diagnosis. The cohort
was examined within a training and validation set. Multivariate analysis
determined renal, lung and Karnofsky Performance Status impairment, frailty and
age as significant risks for overall survival. These were combined in a weighted 
revised Myeloma Comorbidity Index, allowing for the identification of fit
(revised Myeloma Comorbidity Index ≤3 [n=247, 30.8%]), intermediate-fit (revised 
Myeloma Comorbidity Index 4-6 [n=446, 55.7%]) and frail patients (revised Myeloma
Comorbidity Index >6 [n=108, 13.5%]): these subgroups, confirmed via validation
analysis, showed median overall survival rates of 10.1, 4.4 and 1.2 years,
respectively. The revised Myeloma Comorbidity Index was compared to other
commonly used comorbidity indices (Charlson Comorbidity Index, Hematopoietic Cell
Transplantation-Specific Comorbidity Index, Kaplan-Feinstein Index): if each were
divided in risk groups based on 25% and 75% quartiles, highest hazard ratios,
best prediction and Brier scores were achieved with the revised Myeloma
Comorbidity Index. The advantages of the revised Myeloma Comorbidity Index
include its accurate assessment of patients' physical conditions and simple
clinical applicability. We propose the revised Myeloma Comorbidity Index to be
tested with the "reference" International Myeloma Working Group frailty score in 
multicenter analyses and future clinical trials. The study was registered at the 
German Clinical Trials Register (DRKS-00003868).

Copyright© Ferrata Storti Foundation.

DOI: 10.3324/haematol.2016.162693 
PMCID: PMC5477610
PMID: 28154088  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2017 Mar 7;12(3):443-453. doi: 10.2215/CJN.05890616. Epub 
2017 Jan 31.

Perspectives of Older Kidney Transplant Recipients on Kidney Transplantation.

Pinter J(1)(2)(3), Hanson CS(1)(2), Chapman JR(4), Wong G(1)(2)(4), Craig
JC(1)(2), Schell JO(5), Tong A(6)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Sydney School of Public Health, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South
Wales, Australia.
(2)Centre for Kidney Research, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Westmead, New
South Wales, Australia.
(3)Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology, Würzburg University Clinic,
Würzburg, Germany.
(4)Centre for Transplant and Renal Research, Westmead Hospital, Westmead, New
South Wales, Australia; and.
(5)Section of Palliative Care and Medical Ethics, Renal-Electrolyte Division,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(6)Sydney School of Public Health, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South
Wales, Australia; allison.tong@sydney.edu.au.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Older kidney transplant recipients are susceptible to 
cognitive impairment, frailty, comorbidities, immunosuppression-related
complications, and chronic graft failure, however, there has been limited focus
on their concerns and expectations related to transplantation. This study aims to
describe the perspectives of older kidney transplant recipients about their
experience of kidney transplantation, self-management, and treatment goals to
inform strategies and interventions that address their specific needs.
DESIGN, SETTING, PARTICIPANTS, & MEASUREMENTS: Face-to-face semistructured
interviews were conducted with 30 kidney transplant recipients aged 65-80 years
from five renal units in Australia. Transcripts were analyzed thematically.
RESULTS: Six themes were identified: restoring vitality of youth (with subthemes 
of revived mindset for resilience, embracing enjoyment in life, drive for
self-actualization); persisting through prolonged recovery (yielding to aging,
accepting functional limitations, pushing the limit, enduring treatment
responsibilities); imposing sicknesses (combatting devastating comorbidities,
painful restrictions, emerging disillusionment, anxieties about accumulating side
effects, consuming treatment burden); prioritizing graft survival (privileged
with a miracle, negotiating risks for longevity, enacting a moral duty,
preserving the last opportunity); confronting health deterioration (vulnerability
and helplessness, narrowing focus to immediate concerns, uncertainty of
survival); and value of existence (purpose through autonomy, refusing the burden 
of futile treatment, staying alive by all means).
CONCLUSIONS: Older kidney transplant recipients felt able to enjoy life and
strived to live at their newly re-established potential and capability, which
motivated them to protect their graft. However, some felt constrained by slow
recuperation and overwhelmed by unexpected comorbidities, medication-related side
effects, and health decline. Our findings suggest the need to prepare and support
older recipients for self-management responsibilities, clarify their expectations
of post-transplant risks and outcomes, and provide assistance through prolonged
recovery after kidney transplantation.

Copyright © 2017 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.2215/CJN.05890616 
PMCID: PMC5338704
PMID: 28143863  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Nephrol News Issues. 2017 Feb;31(2):21-26.

Nursing home care. Daily HHD vs conventional dialysis: A survival comparison.

Yang A, Lee A, Hocking K.

Patients that dialyze in the nursing home setting are known to be an especially
at-risk vulnerable population compared to the overall ESRD population. This is
likely due to the nursing home dialysis patients' advanced age, multiple
co-morbidities, and frailty, requiring skilled nursing support. These challenges 
often result in worse outcomes compared to the overall end-stage renal disease
(ESRD) population but few studies have investigated interventions to improve
health outcomes in this population. Previously, we reported results from a study 
using a large epidemiological database of patients from an independent nursing
home dialysis provider, showing that patients treated with daily home
hemodialysis had improved outcomes compared to patients treated with conventional
dialysis. One limitation of the previous study was that the timeframe for the two
comparison groups was different; therefore, the results could have been due to
over-all improvements in care over time unrelated to the modality of dialysis: To
address this as well as expand on the previous analysis, the objective of the
present study was to compare outcomes in ESRD patients in the nursing home
setting treated with daily home hemodialysis versus con- ventional
three-day-a-week (TIW) hemodialysis using an updated database, specifically
assessing patients treated during a concurrent time: frame. Health status was
evaluated for 6,314 patients (n=4,778 conventional, n=1,902 daily home
hemodialysis; 2006 to November 2015 for conventional; 2011 to November 2015 for
daily home hemodialysis). Analyses included monthly mortality rates, Kaplan-Meier
survival analysis, and laboratory values. In the "Compared to the conventional
dialysis population, daily HHD patients had similar or lower incident mortality
rates." analysis of patients treated during the concurrent timeframe, median
overall survival was 36 months with daily home hemodialysis versus 21 months with
conventional dialysis (P=0.0025). These results were similar to the analysis of
all patients regardless of timeframe. Compared to the conventional dialysis
population, daily home hemodialysis patients had similar or lower incident
mortality rates. Survival rates were higher at 3 months (89% vs 82%), 6 months
(84% vs 73%), and 12 months (74% vs 62%) in the daily home hemodialy- sis
population compared to conventional dialysis population. Monthly mean albumin was
consistent over time in the daily home hemodialysis population but gradually
increased in the conventional dialysis population. Hemoglobin values were
consistently lower over the follow-up period in the daily home hemodialysis
population and ferritin values were similar in both populations. These results
confirm and extend previous findings that daily home hemodialysis is associated
with improved patient outcomes compared to conventional hemodialysis. Although
difficult to conduct practically, a prospective randomized outcomes study
evaluating daily home hemodialysis versus conventional TIW dialysis would be
valuable in informing the standard of dialysis care in this population.


PMID: 30408406  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Ren Nutr. 2017 Mar;27(2):106-112. doi: 10.1053/j.jrn.2016.11.003. Epub 2017 Jan
4.

The Prevalence, Association, and Clinical Outcomes of Frailty in Maintenance
Dialysis Patients.

Lee SY(1), Yang DH(1), Hwang E(2), Kang SH(3), Park SH(4), Kim TW(5), Lee DH(6), 
Park K(7), Kim JC(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Nephrology, CHA Bundang Medical
Center, CHA University School of Medicine, Seongnam, South Korea.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Nephrology, Keimyung University
School of Medicine, Daegu, South Korea.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Nephrology, Yeungnam University
Hospital, Daegu, South Korea.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Nephrology, Kyungpook National
University Hospital, Daegu, South Korea.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Nephrology, Soonchunhyang
University Gumi Hospital, Gumi, South Korea.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Nephrology, Daegu Fatima
Hospital, Daegu, South Korea.
(7)Department of Preventive Medicine, School of Medicine Gyeongsang National
University, Jinju, South Korea.
(8)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Nephrology, CHA Gumi Medical
Center, CHA University, Gumi, South Korea. Electronic address:
truedoc1@hanmail.net.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the clinical implications of frailty in chronic kidney 
disease patients undergoing maintenance hemodialysis and chronic peritoneal
dialysis.
DESIGN: In this prospective study, all of the participants completed the Short
Form of the Kidney Disease Quality of Life questionnaire, Korean version, to
determine their frailty phenotype. We also obtained blood chemistry and
demographic data at enrollment. Data regarding the history of hospitalization and
death were collected during the follow-up period.
SUBJECTS: We recruited 1,658 patients (1,255 maintenance hemodialysis and 403
chronic peritoneal dialysis) from multidialysis units (n = 27). We excluded
patients who had been hospitalized in the previous 3 months.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Hospitalization and survival rate during study period.
RESULTS: The participants' mean age was 55.2 ± 11.9 years old, and 55.2% were
male. Among the participants, 34.8% were rated as frail and 45.7% as prefrail.
Multivariate analysis demonstrated significant associations of frailty with age, 
comorbidity, disability, unemployment, higher body mass index, and a lower
educational level. During the follow-up period (median 17.1 months), 608 patients
(79 not frail, 250 prefrail, and 279 frail) were hospitalized, and 87 patients
(10 not frail, 24 prefrail, and 53 frail) died (P < .001). Frailty was associated
with hospitalization (adjusted hazard ratio, 1.80; 95% confidence interval:
1.38-2.36) and mortality (hazard ratio, 2.37, 95% confidence interval:
1.11-5.02).
CONCLUSION: The frailty phenotype was common even in, prevalent end-stage renal
disease patients on dialysis, and was significantly associated with higher rates 
of hospitalization and mortality.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.jrn.2016.11.003 
PMID: 28065454  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


171. World J Transplant. 2016 Dec 24;6(4):650-657. doi: 10.5500/wjt.v6.i4.650.

Older candidates for kidney transplantation: Who to refer and what to expect?

Concepcion BP(1), Forbes RC(1), Schaefer HM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Beatrice P Concepcion, Heidi M Schaefer, Department of Medicine, Division of
Nephrology and Hypertension, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 
37232, United States.

The number of older end-stage renal disease patients being referred for kidney
transplantation continues to increase. This rise is occurring alongside the
continually increasing prevalence of older end-stage renal disease patients.
Although older kidney transplant recipients have decreased patient and graft
survival compared to younger patients, transplantation in this patient population
is pursued due to the survival advantage that it confers over remaining on the
deceased donor waiting list. The upper limit of age and the extent of comorbidity
and frailty at which transplantation ceases to be advantageous is not known.
Transplant physicians are therefore faced with the challenge of determining who
among older patients are appropriate candidates for kidney transplantation. This 
is usually achieved by means of an organ systems-based medical evaluation with
particular focus given to cardiovascular health. More recently, global measures
of health such as functional status and frailty are increasingly being recognized
as potential tools in risk stratifying kidney transplant candidates. For those
candidates who are deemed eligible, living donor transplantation should be
pursued. This may mean accepting a kidney from an older living donor. In the
absence of any living donor, the choice to accept lesser quality kidneys should
be made while taking into account the organ shortage and expected waiting times
on the deceased donor list. Appropriate counseling of patients should be a
cornerstone in the evaluation process and includes a discussion regarding
expected outcomes, expected waiting times in the setting of the new Kidney
Allocation System, benefits of living donor transplantation and the acceptance of
lesser quality kidneys.

DOI: 10.5500/wjt.v6.i4.650 
PMCID: PMC5175222
PMID: 28058214 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: The authors have 
no potential conflicts of interest.


172. JACC Heart Fail. 2017 Jan;5(1):44-52. doi: 10.1016/j.jchf.2016.09.016.

Predictors and Prognostic Implications of Incident Heart Failure in Patients
With Prevalent Atrial Fibrillation.

Pandey A(1), Kim S(2), Moore C(1), Thomas L(2), Gersh B(3), Allen LA(4), Kowey
PR(5), Mahaffey KW(6), Hylek E(7), Peterson ED(2), Piccini JP(2), Fonarow GC(8); 
ORBIT-AF Investigators and Patients.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas.
(2)Division of Cardiology, Duke Clinical Research Institute, Durham, North
Carolina.
(3)Department of Cardiovascular Diseases, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(4)Department of Medicine, Section of Advanced Heart Failure, University of
Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado.
(5)Lankenau Institute for Medical Research, Wynnewood, Pennsylvania.
(6)Stanford Center for Clinical Research (SCCR), Department of Medicine, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, California.
(7)Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts.
(8)Division of Cardiology, Ronald Reagan-UCLA Medical Center, Los Angeles,
California. Electronic address: gfonarow@mednet.ucla.edu.

Comment in
    JACC Heart Fail. 2017 Jan;5(1):53-55.
    JACC Heart Fail. 2017 Jun;5(6):468.
    JACC Heart Fail. 2017 Jun;5(6):468-469.

OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this study was to determine the significant clinical
predictors of incident heart failure (HF) and its prognostic effect on long-term 
outcomes among community-based patients with established atrial
fibrillation (AF).
BACKGROUND: AF is associated with an increased risk of HF. However, in this
population, little focus is placed on risk stratification for and the prevention 
of HF.
METHODS: Patients with AF but without HF at baseline enrolled in the ORBIT-AF
(Outcomes Registry for Informed Treatment of Atrial Fibrillation) registry were
included. Separate multivariable-adjusted Cox frailty regression models were used
to identify significant predictors of HF incidence and determine the associated
risk of adverse clinical events.
RESULTS: The study included 6,545 participants with AF from 173 participating
sites. Incident HF developed in 236 participants (3.6%) over the 2-year follow-up
period; ejection fraction was preserved (>40%) in 64%, reduced (≤40%) in 13.5%,
and missing in 22.5%. In multivariable analysis, traditional HF risk factors
(age, coronary artery disease, renal dysfunction, and valvular disease), presence
of permanent AF (hazard ratio [HR]: 1.60 [95% confidence interval (CI): 1.18 to
2.16]; reference group: paroxysmal AF), and elevated baseline heart rate (HR:
1.07 [95% CI: 1.02 to 1.13] per 5 beats/min higher heart rate) were independently
associated with incident HF risk. Incident HF among patients with AF was
independently associated with higher risk of mortality, all-cause
hospitalization, and bleeding events.
CONCLUSIONS: Incident HF among patients with AF is common, is more likely to be
HF with preserved ejection fraction, and is associated with poor long-term
outcomes. Traditional HF risk factors, AF type, and baseline heart rate are
independent clinical predictors of incident HF.

Copyright © 2017 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jchf.2016.09.016 
PMID: 28034376  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Am J Cardiol. 2017 Feb 15;119(4):669-674. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2016.10.053.
Epub 2016 Nov 16.

Effect of Chronic Kidney Disease on Mortality in Patients Who Underwent Lower
Extremity Peripheral Vascular Intervention.

Xie JX(1), Glorioso TJ(2), Dattilo PB(1), Aggarwal V(1), Ho PM(2), Barón AE(2),
Donaldson D(2), Armstrong EJ(2), Klein A(3), Giri J(4), Tsai TT(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora,
Colorado.
(2)Division of Cardiology, VA Eastern Colorado Health Care System, Denver,
Colorado.
(3)Division of Cardiology, St. Louis University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri.
(4)Division of Cardiology, Philadelphia VA Medical Center, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania.
(5)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora,
Colorado; Division of Cardiology, VA Eastern Colorado Health Care System, Denver,
Colorado; Institute for Health Research, Kaiser Permanente Colorado, Denver,
Colorado. Electronic address: thomas.tsai@coloradooutcomes.org.

It is known that chronic kidney disease (CKD) is associated with increased
postoperative morbidity and mortality in patients with peripheral artery disease 
who underwent lower extremity surgical revascularization; however, outcomes after
peripheral vascular intervention (PVI) are less well established. This study
sought to determine the impact of CKD on adverse outcomes in patients with
peripheral artery disease who underwent PVI. Using data from the Veteran Affairs 
Clinical Assessment, Reporting, and Tracking System Program, we identified a
cohort of 755 patients who underwent lower extremity PVI from June 2005 to August
2010 at 33 sites. The outcomes of interest were mortality, progression to
dialysis, myocardial infarction, limb amputation, and stroke. Kaplan-Meier
survival analysis and Cox proportional hazard frailty models assessed the
association between CKD and adverse outcomes. Of the patients who underwent lower
extremity PVI, 201 patients (27%) had CKD. The presence of CKD was associated
with decreased survival (5-year survival probability of CKD compared with
non-CKD: 49.9% [41.6% to 59.9%] vs 80.1% [76.2% to 84.1]), which persisted after 
risk adjustment (HR 1.57; 95% confidence interval 1.13 to 2.19). In addition,
there was a significant association between CKD and progression to dialysis (HR
6.62; 95% confidence interval 2.25 to 19.43). In contrast, there was no
association between CKD and re-hospitalization for myocardial infarction, limb
amputation, or stroke. In conclusion, CKD is present in 1 of 4 patients who
underwent PVI and is associated with increased risk of mortality and progression 
to dialysis.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2016.10.053 
PMID: 28027725  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Am J Cardiol. 2017 Feb 1;119(3):457-460. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2016.10.019. Epub
2016 Nov 1.

Psoas Muscle Area as a Predictor of Outcomes in Transcatheter Aortic Valve
Implantation.

Garg L(1), Agrawal S(2), Pew T(3), Hanzel GS(4), Abbas AE(4), Gallagher MJ(4),
Shannon FL(4), Hanson ID(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Lehigh Valley Health Network,
Allentown, Pennsylvania.
(2)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, St. Luke's University Health Network,
Bethlehem, Pennsylvania.
(3)Oakland University William Beaumont School of Medicine, Rochester, Michigan.
(4)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Beaumont Health System, Royal Oak,
Michigan.
(5)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Beaumont Health System, Royal Oak,
Michigan. Electronic address: Ivan.Hanson@beaumont.edu.

Frailty is a powerful predictor of outcomes after transcatheter aortic valve
implantation (TAVI). Sarcopenia as assessed by psoas muscle area (PMA) is a
validated tool to assess frailty before surgical procedures. We evaluated PMA as 
a predictor of outcomes after TAVI in 152 consecutive patients who underwent this
procedure at our institution from 2011 to 2014. Preoperative computed tomography 
scans were used to measure PMA, which then was indexed to body surface area.
Outcomes evaluated included (1) early poor outcome (30 days mortality, stroke,
dialysis, and prolonged ventilation), (2) 1-year mortality, and (3) high-resource
utilization (length of stay >7 days, discharge to rehabilitation, or readmission 
within 30 days). Indexed PMA (odds ratio [OR] 3.19, confidence interval [CI] 1.30
to 7.83; p = 0.012) and age (OR 1.92, CI 1.87 to 1.98; p = 0.012) predicted early
poor outcome. Society of Thoracic Surgeons score predicted 1-year mortality
(hazard ratio 3.07, CI 1.93 to 6.23; p = 0.011). High-resource utilization was
observed more frequently in patients with PMA less than the median (73% vs 51%,
OR 2.65, CI 1.32 to 5.36; p = 0.006). In conclusion, indexed PMA predicts early
poor outcome and high-resource utilization after TAVI.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2016.10.019 
PMID: 27931723  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


175. G Ital Cardiol (Rome). 2016 Sep;17(9):756-789. doi: 10.1714/2448.25664.

[ANMCO/SIC/SICI-GISE/SICCH Consensus document: Risk stratification in elderly
patients undergoing cardiac surgery and transcatheter aortic valve implantation].

[Article in Italian]

Pulignano G(1), Gulizia MM(2), Baldasseroni S(3), Bedogni F(4), Cioffi G(5),
Indolfi C(6), Romeo F(7), Murrone A(8), Musumeci F(9), Parolari A(10), Patanè
L(11), Pino PG(12), Mongiardo A(6), Spaccarotella C(6), Di Bartolomeo R(13),
Musumeci G(14).

Author information: 
(1)U.O.C. Cardiologia 1, Ospedale San Camillo-Forlanini, Roma.
(2)U.O.C. Cardiologia, Ospedale Garibaldi-Nesima, Azienda di Rilievo Nazionale e 
Alta Specializzazione "Garibaldi", Catania.
(3)Cardiologia Generale, AOU Careggi, Firenze.
(4)U.O. Cardiologia-UTIC, IRCCS Policlinico San Donato, San Donato Milanese (MI).
(5)U.O. Cardiologia e Medicina, Casa di Cura Villa Bianca, Trento.
(6)U.O. Cardiologia - Campus Universitario, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria
Mater Domini, Catanzaro.
(7)U.O.C. Cardiologia e Cardiologia Interventistica, Policlinico "Tor Vergata",
Roma.
(8)Cardiologia e Fisiopatologia Cardiovascolare, Azienda Ospedaliera di Perugia, 
Perugia.
(9)U.O.C. Cardiochirurgia, Ospedale San Camillo-Forlanini, Roma.
(10)U.O. Cardiochirurgia, Centro Cardiologico Monzino IRCCS, Università degli
Studi, Milano.
(11)Presidio Cardiologico Cardiochirurgico (Centro Cuore), Centro Clinico
Diagnostico G.B. Morgagni, Pedara (CT).
(12)U.O. Cardiologia 2, Ospedale San Camillo-Forlanini, Roma.
(13)U.O. Cardiochirurgia, Ospedale Policlinico S. Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna.
(14)Dipartimento Cardiovascolare, ASST Papa Giovanni XXIII, Bergamo.

Aortic stenosis is one the most frequent valvular diseases in developed
countries, and its impact on public healthcare resources and assistance is
increasing. A substantial proportion of elderly patients with severe aortic
stenosis is frequently not eligible for surgery because of advanced age, frailty 
and multiple comorbidities. Transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI)
enables the treatment of very elderly patients at high or prohibitive surgical
risk considered ineligible for surgery and with an acceptable life expectancy.
However, a significant proportion of patients die or do not achieve an
improvement of quality of life in the short to medium-term follow-up. It is
important to determine: 1) whether and how much patient frailty influences the
procedural risk; 2) whether quality of life and the individual patient survival
are influenced by aortic valve disease alone or by other associated factors; 3)
whether a geriatric specialist intervention to evaluate and correct other
diseases with their potential or already evident disabilities can improve the
results of TAVI, in particular patient quality of life. Consequently, in addition
to risk stratification with conventional tools, a number of factors including
multimorbidity, disability, frailty and cognitive function should be considered
in order to assess the expected benefit of TAVI. Preoperative optimization
through a multidisciplinary approach with a Heart Team can counteract the
multiple damage (cardiac, neurological, muscular, respiratory, renal) that can
potentially worsen the reduced physiological reserves characteristic of frailty. 
The systematic implementation into clinical practice of multidimensional
assessment instruments of frailty and cognitive function for screening and
exercise, and the adoption of specific care pathways should facilitate this task.

DOI: 10.1714/2448.25664 
PMID: 27869890  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Int J Biostat. 2016 Nov 1;12(2). pii:
/j/ijb.2016.12.issue-2/ijb-2016-0002/ijb-2016-0002.xml. doi:
10.1515/ijb-2016-0002.

Joint Model for Mortality and Hospitalization.

Chen Y, Guo W, Kotanko P, Usvyat L, Wang Y.

Modeling hospitalization is complicated because the follow-up time can be
censored due to death. In this paper, we propose a shared frailty joint model for
survival time and hospitalization. A random effect semi-parametric proportional
hazard model is assumed for the survival time and conditional on the follow-up
time, hospital admissions or total length of stay is modeled by a generalized
linear model with a nonparametric offset function of the follow-up time. We
assume that the hospitalization and the survival time are correlated through a
latent subject-specific random frailty. The proposed model can be implemented
using existing software such as SAS Proc NLMIXED. We demonstrate the feasibility 
through simulations. We apply our methods to study hospital admissions and total 
length of stay in a cohort of patients on hemodialysis. We identify age, albumin,
neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio (NLR) and vintage as significant risk factors for 
mortality, and age, gender, race, albumin, NLR, pre-dialysis systolic blood
pressure (preSBP), interdialytic weight gain (IDWG) and equilibrated Kt/V (eKt/V)
as significant risk factors for both hospital admissions and total length of
stay. In addition, hospitalization admissions is positively associated with
vintage.

DOI: 10.1515/ijb-2016-0002 
PMID: 27831920  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Cien Saude Colet. 2016 Nov;21(11):3493-3498. doi:
10.1590/1413-812320152111.18222015.

[Factors associated with the frailty of elderly people with chronic kidney
disease on hemodialysis].

[Article in Portuguese]

Gesualdo GD(1), Zazzetta MS(2), Say KG(2), Orlandi FS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Enfermagem Fundamental, Escola de Enfermagem de
Ribeirão Preto, Universidade de São Paulo. Av. Bandeirantes 3900, Bairro Monte
Alegre. 14049-900 Ribeirão Preto SP Brasil. gabrieladutra.gesualdo@yahoo.com.br.
(2)Departamento de Gerontologia, UFSCar. São Carlos SP Brasil.

The scope of this article is to identify sociodemographic and clinical factors
associated with the frailty of elderly people with chronic kidney disease on
hemodialysis. This involved a correlational, cross-sectional study conducted in a
dialysis center in the state of São Paulo. The sample consisted of 60
participants. The Participant Characterization Instrument was used for extracting
sociodemographic and clinical data and the Edmonton Frail Scale was used to
evaluate the level of frailty. Multivariate logistic regression was used to
identify the factors associated with frailty. The mean age of the 60 patients
included was 71.1 (± 6.9) years, predominantly male (70%), of which 36.7% were
classified as frail. With respect to the factors associated with frailty among
the variables of gender, age, self-reported skin color, schooling, monthly per
capita income, hemodialysis time, number of associated diseases, falls in the
year, hematocrit level, parathyroid hormone and use of calcitriol, it was found
that only the monthly per capita income was significantly associated with frailty
(OR = 0.44; 95% CI 0.1-0.9; p = 0.04). There was an association between frailty
and income, showing that the elderly most at risk of frailty were those with
lower income.

DOI: 10.1590/1413-812320152111.18222015 
PMID: 27828582  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Arch Gerontol Geriatr. 2017 Jan - Feb;68:135-142. doi:
10.1016/j.archger.2016.10.007. Epub 2016 Oct 22.

Frailty and chronic kidney disease: A systematic review.

Chowdhury R(1), Peel NM(2), Krosch M(2), Hubbard RE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Research in Geriatric Medicine, The University of Queensland,
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. Electronic address:
rakin.chowdhury@uqconnect.edu.au.
(2)Centre for Research in Geriatric Medicine, The University of Queensland,
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.

OBJECTIVE: Frailty is associated with increased vulnerability to poor health.
There is growing interest in understanding the association between frailty and
chronic kidney disease (CKD). This systematic review explored how frailty is
measured in patients with CKD and the association between frailty and adverse
outcomes across different stages of renal impairment.
STUDY DESIGN: Systematic analysis of peer reviewed articles.
DATA SOURCES: Pubmed, Medline, Web of Science and Cochrane were used to identify 
the articles.
DATA SYNTHESIS: Articles published before the 17th of September 2016, that
measured frailty in patients with CKD was eligible for the systematic review. Two
independent researchers assessed the eligibility of the articles. Quality of the 
articles was assessed using the Epidemiological Appraisal Instrument.
RESULTS: The literature search yielded 540 articles, of which 32 met the study
criteria and were included in the review (n=36,076, age range: 50-83 years).
Twenty-three (72%) studies used or adapted the Fried phenotype to measure
frailty. The prevalence of frailty ranged from 7% in community-dwellers (CKD
Stages 1-4) to 73% in a cohort of patients on haemodialysis. The incidence of
frailty increased with reduced glomerular filtration rate. Frailty was associated
with an increased risk of mortality and hospitalization.
CONCLUSION: Frailty is prevalent in patients with CKD and it is associated with
an increased risk of adverse health outcomes. There are differences in the
methods used to assess frailty and this hinders comparisons between studies.

Crown Copyright Â© 2016. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.archger.2016.10.007 
PMID: 27810661  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Am J Nephrol. 2016;44(6):473-480. Epub 2016 Nov 1.

Cognitive Impairment in Advanced Chronic Kidney Disease: The Canadian Frailty
Observation and Interventions Trial.

Foster R(1), Walker S, Brar R, Hiebert B, Komenda P, Rigatto C, Storsley L,
Prasad B, Bohm C, Tangri N.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Chronic kidney disease (CKD) affects more than one third of older
adults, and is a strong risk factor for vascular disease and cognitive
impairment. Cognitive impairment can have detrimental effects on the quality of
life through decreased treatment adherence and poor nutrition and results in
increased costs of care and early mortality. Though widely studied in
hemodialysis populations, little is known about cognitive impairment in patients 
with pre-dialysis CKD.
METHODS: Multicenter, cross-sectional, prospective cohort study including 385
patients with CKD stages G4-G5. Cognitive function was measured with a validated 
tool called the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) as part of a comprehensive
frailty assessment in the Canadian Frailty Observation and Interventions Trial.
Cognitive impairment was defined as a MoCA score of ≤24. We determined the
prevalence and risk factors for cognitive impairment in patients with CKD stages 
G4-G5, not on dialysis.
RESULTS: Two hundred and thirty seven participants (61%) with CKD stages G4-G5
had cognitive impairment at baseline assessment. When compared to a control
group, this population scored lower in all domains of cognition, with the most
pronounced deficits observed in recall, attention, and visual/executive function 
(p < 0.01 for all comparisons). Older age, recent history of falls and history of
stroke were independently associated with cognitive impairment.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study uncovered a high rate of unrecognized cognitive impairment
in an advanced CKD population. This impairment is global, affecting all aspects
of cognition and is likely vascular in nature. The longitudinal trajectory of
cognitive function and its effect on dialysis decision-making and outcomes
deserves further study.

© 2016 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000450837 
PMID: 27798938  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Recenti Prog Med. 2016 Oct;107(10):525-550. doi: 10.1701/2454.25704.

[Treating HIV disease: back to the patient?]

[Article in Italian]

Girardi E(1), d'Arminio Monforte A(2), Camoni L(3), Pezzotti P(3), Guaraldi G(4),
Ammassari A(5), Antinori A(6), Bonora S(7), Mussini C(8), Cingolani A(9),
Corbelli GM(10), Adami S(11), Degli Esposti L(12), Andretta M(13).

Author information: 
(1)UOC Epidemiologia Clinica, INMI Lazzaro Spallanzani - IRCCS, Roma.
(2)Clinica Malattie Infettive, Dipartimento di Scienze della Salute, ASST Santi
Paolo e Carlo, Università di Milano.
(3)Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Dipartimento di Malattie Infettive, Parassitarie
e Immunomediate, Roma.
(4)Clinica delle Malattie Infettive, Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche e
Chirurgiche del bambino e dell'adulto, Università di Modena e Reggio Emilia.
(5)UOC Immunodeficienze Virali e Neuro-Oncologia Infettiva, INMI Lazzaro
Spallanzani, Roma; Dipartimento di Clinica e di Ricerca Clinica, INMI Lazzaro
Spallanzani, Roma.
(6)Area Dipartimentale HIV/AIDS, Istituto Nazionale per le Malattie Infettive
Lazzaro Spallanzani IRCCS, Roma.
(7)Sezione di Malattie infettive, Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche, Università di 
Torino.
(8)Clinica Malattie Infettive, Università di Modena.
(9)Clinica Malattie Infettive, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma.
(10)Chair European Community Advisory Board.
(11)Settore Farmaceutico-Protesica-Dispositivi medici Regione del Veneto.
(12)CliCon - Health, Economics & Outcome Research.
(13)Coordinamento Regionale Unico sul Farmaco, Verona.

HIV disease has dramatically changed in the last two decades from a progressive, 
lethal disease to a chronic manageable condition. These changes are due to the
availability of potent antiretroviral combination therapy, which also have the
potential to contribute significantly to the control of the epidemic. Among
persons living with HIV, incidence of immunosuppression-related opportunistic
illnesses has clearly decreased, while an increase was observed in the prevalence
of age-related noncommunicable comorbidities, including cardiovascular,
metabolic, renal, bone and hepatic disease, due to chronic inflammatory state and
to an overall aging of the population of persons with HIV. It has been predicted 
that by 2030 more than 80% of older persons with HIV will have at least one
comorbidity, compared to 19% of non HIV-infected persons, and that one fourth of 
these persons will have three or more comorbidities. Among persons with HIV, the 
prevalence of frailty is increasing. Choice of therapeutic approach to HIV
disease should take into account, in addition to the ability of drug combination 
to suppress viral replication, the potential for long term adherence to
treatment, the lack of long term toxicity, the possibility to fully restore
immune function and prevent immune activation, thus reducing the risk of chronic 
inflammation related disease. In addition the overall impact of treatment on
patients' well-being must be considered, and patients related outcomes should be 
used to measure this impact.

DOI: 10.1701/2454.25704 
PMID: 27782228  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Am J Transplant. 2017 Apr;17(4):1031-1041. doi: 10.1111/ajt.14061. Epub 2016 Oct 
24.

First-Year Waitlist Hospitalization and Subsequent Waitlist and Transplant
Outcome.

Lynch RJ(1), Zhang R(2), Patzer RE(1)(3), Larsen CP(1), Adams AB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Transplantation, Department of Surgery, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, Rollins School of Public Health, Emory
University, Atlanta, GA.
(3)Department of Epidemiology, Rollins School of Public Health, Emory University,
Atlanta, GA.

Frailty is associated with inferior survival and increased resource requirements 
among kidney transplant candidates, but assessments are time-intensive and costly
and require direct patient interaction. Waitlist hospitalization may be a proxy
for patient fitness and could help those at risk of poor outcomes. We examined
United States Renal Data System data from 51 111 adult end-stage renal disease
patients with continuous Medicare coverage who were waitlisted for transplant
from January 2000 to December 2011. Heavily admitted patients had higher
subsequent resource requirements, increased waitlist mortality and decreased
likelihood of transplant (death after listing: 1-7 days: hazard ratio [HR] 1.24, 
95% confidence interval [CI] 1.20-1.28; 8-14 days: HR 1.49, 95% CI 1.42-1.56; ≥15
days: HR 2.07, 95% CI 1.99-2.15; vs. 0 days). Graft and recipient survival was
inferior, with higher admissions, although survival benefit was preserved. A
model including waitlist admissions alone performed better (C statistic 0.76, 95%
CI 0.74-0.80) in predicting postlisting mortality than estimated posttransplant
survival (C statistic 0.69, 95% CI 0.67-0.73). Although those with a heavy burden
of admissions may still benefit from kidney transplant, less utility is derived
from allografts placed in this population. Current kidney allocation policy,
which is based in part on longevity matching, could be significantly improved by 
consideration of hospitalization records of transplant candidates.

© 2016 The American Society of Transplantation and the American Society of
Transplant Surgeons.

DOI: 10.1111/ajt.14061 
PMID: 27664797  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Int J Infect Dis. 2016 Dec;53:61-68. doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2016.10.004. Epub 2016
Oct 15.

HIV and aging.

Wing EJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Miriam Hospital, Brown University, 164 Summit Avenue, Providence, RI
02906, USA. Electronic address: Edward_Wing_MD@brown.edu.

Comment in
    Int J Infect Dis. 2016 Dec;53:59-60.

With the wider availability of antiretrovirals, the world's HIV population is
aging. More than 10% of the 34.5 million HIV-positive individuals worldwide are
over the age of 50 years and the average age continues to increase. In the USA
more than 50% of the 1.3 million people with HIV are over 50 years old and by the
year 2030 it is estimated that 70% will be over the age of 50 years. Although the
life expectancy of HIV-positive people has increased dramatically, it still lags 
behind that of HIV-negative individuals. There is controversy about whether HIV
itself accelerates the aging process. Elevated rates of inflammation seen in
people with HIV, even if their viral loads are suppressed and their CD4 counts
are preserved, are associated with greater rates of cardiovascular, renal,
neurocognitive, oncological, and osteoporotic disease. These conditions increase 
exponentially in the elderly and will represent a major challenge for HIV
patients. In addition, conditions such as geriatric syndromes including frailty
are also seen at higher rates. Management of the aging HIV patient includes an
emphasis on early diagnosis and treatment, preventative measures for
co-morbidities, and avoiding polypharmacy. Finally, the issue of quality of life,
prioritization of medical issues, and end of life care become increasingly
important as the patient grows older.

Copyright © 2016 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijid.2016.10.004 
PMID: 27756678  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2017 Jul 1;72(7):958-964. doi:
10.1093/gerona/glw199.

Cardiovascular Dysfunction and Frailty Among Older Adults in the Community: The
ARIC Study.

Nadruz W Jr(1)(2), Kitzman D(3), Windham BG(4), Kucharska-Newton A(5), Butler
K(4), Palta P(5), Griswold ME(4), Wagenknecht LE(6), Heiss G(5), Solomon SD(1),
Skali H(1), Shah AM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Campinas, Campinas, Brazil.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North
Carolina.
(4)Department of Medicine, Geriatrics University of Mississippi Medical Center,
Jackson.
(5)Department of Epidemiology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.
(6)Division of Public Health Sciences, Wake Forest School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, North Carolina.

Background: The contribution of cardiovascular dysfunction to frailty in older
adults is uncertain. This study aimed to define the relationship between frailty 
and cardiovascular structure and function, and determine whether these
associations are independent of coexisting abnormalities in other organ systems.
Methods: We studied 3,991 older adults (mean age 75.6±5.0 years; 59% female) from
the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) Study in whom the following six
organ systems were uniformly assessed: cardiac (by echocardiography), vascular
(by ankle-brachial-index and pulse-wave-velocity), pulmonary (by spirometry),
renal (by estimated glomerular filtration rate), hematologic (by hemoglobin), and
adipose (by body mass index and bioimpedance). Frailty was defined by the
presence of ≥3 of the following: low strength, low energy, slowed motor
performance, low physical activity, or unintentional weight loss.
Results: Two hundred eleven (5.3%) participants were frail. In multivariable
analyses adjusted for demographics, diabetes, hypertension, and measures of other
organ system function, frailty was independently and additively associated with
left ventricular hypertrophy (odds ratio [OR] = 1.72; 95% confidence interval
[CI] = 1.30-2.40), reduced global longitudinal strain (reflecting systolic
function; OR = 1.68; 95% CI = 1.16-2.44), and greater left atrial volume index
(reflecting diastolic function; OR = 1.60; 95% CI = 1.13-2.27), which together
demonstrated the greatest association with frailty (OR = 2.10; 95% CI =
1.57-2.82) of the systems studied. Lower magnitude associations were observed for
vascular and pulmonary abnormalities, anemia, and impaired renal function.
Cardiovascular abnormalities remained associated with frailty after excluding
participants with prevalent cardiovascular disease.
Conclusions: Abnormalities of cardiac structure and function are independently
associated with frailty, and together show the greatest association with frailty 
among the organ systems studied.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The
Gerontological Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, please
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/gerona/glw199 
PMCID: PMC5458397
PMID: 27733425  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Adv Nurs. 2017 Mar;73(3):716-734. doi: 10.1111/jan.13179. Epub 2016 Nov 23.

ExplorinG frailty and mild cognitive impairmEnt in kidney tRansplantation to
predict biomedicAl, psychosocial and health cost outcomeS (GERAS): protocol of a 
nationwide prospective cohort study.

Mauthner O(1), Claes V(1), Walston J(2), Engberg S(1)(3), Binet I(4), Dickenmann 
M(5), Golshayan D(6), Hadaya K(7), Huynh-Do U(8), Calciolari S(9), De Geest
S(1)(10); GERAS study consortium; For the Psychosocial Interest Group; Swiss
Transplant Cohort Study (STCS).

Collaborators: Berben L, Burkhalter H, Denhaerynck K, Helmy R, Kirsch M, Leppla
L, Struker M, Boehler A, Gerull S, Koller MT, Boely E, Catana E, Simcox A, Seiler
A, Klaghofer R, Künzler-Heule P, Beckmann S, Achermann R, Amico P, Aubert JD,
Baumann P, Beldi G, Benden C, Berger C, Bochud PY, Boely E, Bucher H, Bühler L,
Carell T, Catana E, Chalandon Y, de Rougemont O, Duchosal M, Fehr T,
Ferrari-Lacraz S, Garzoni C, Soccal PG, Giostra E, Halter J, Heim D, Hess C,
Hillinger S, Hirsch HH, Hofbauer G, Immer F, Klaghofer R, Koller M, Laesser B,
Lehmann R, Lovis C, Manuel O, Marti HP, Martin PY, Martinolli L, Meylan P,
Mohacsi P, Morard I, Morel P, Mueller U, Mueller NJ, Mueller-McKenna H, Müller A,
Müller T, Müllhaupt B, Nadal D, Pascual M, Passweg J, Ziegler CP, Rick J, Roosnek
E, Rosselet A, Rothlin S, Ruschitzka F, Schanz U, Schaub S, Schnyder A, Seiler C,
Stampf S, Steiger J, Stirnimann G, Toso C, Van Delden C, Venetz JP, Villard J,
Wick M, Wilhelm M, Yerly P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Nursing Science, University of Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Center on Aging and Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland,
USA.
(3)School of Nursing, University of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Clinic of Nephrology and Transplantation Medicine, Cantonal Hospital St
Gallen, Switzerland.
(5)Department for Transplantation-Immunology and Nephrology, University Hospital 
Basel, Switzerland.
(6)Transplantation Centre and Transplantation Immunopathology Laboratory,
University Hospital Lausanne, Switzerland.
(7)Department of Nephrology, University Hospital Geneva, Switzerland.
(8)University Clinic for Nephrology, Hypertension and Clinical Pharmacology,
University Hospital Bern, Switzerland.
(9)Institute of Economics, University of Lugano, Switzerland.
(10)Academic Center for Nursing and Midwifery, KU Leuven, Belgium.

AIM: To present the rationale, design and methodology of the GERAS project, which
examines whether assessment of frailty and mild cognitive impairment could
enhance risk prediction for biomedical, psychosocial outcomes and foster
efficient resource allocation in kidney transplantation.
BACKGROUND: For the burgeoning cohort of older patients considered for kidney
transplantation, evidence gaps regarding frailty and mild cognitive impairment
limit clinical decision-making and medical management. As known risk factors for 
'hard' clinical outcomes in chronic illness, both require further study in
transplantation. Integrating these and other bio-psychosocial factors into a
comprehensive pre-transplant patient assessment will provide insights regarding
economic implications and may improve risk prediction.
DESIGN: A nation-wide multi-centre prospective cohort study nested in the Swiss
Transplant Cohort Study.
METHODS: Our nationally representative convenience sample includes 250 adult
kidney transplant recipients. Data sources include the Swiss Transplant Cohort
Study and primary data collected at time of transplantation, 6 months, 1 and
2 years post-transplant via established measures (the Montreal Cognitive
Assessment, Psychosocial Questionnaire, Fried Frailty Instrument and a blood
analysis), investigator-developed instruments and datasets compiled by hospitals'
management control units, sickness funds, the Swiss Federal Statistical Office
and the European Renal Association. Descriptive, competing risk survival and
mixed effects analyses will be performed. Research Ethics Committee approval was 
obtained in January 2016.
DISCUSSION: This pioneering project jointly examines frailty and mild cognitive
impairment from bio-psychosocial and health economic perspectives. Results may
significantly inform risk prediction, care tailoring and resource optimization to
improve health outcomes in the ageing kidney transplant cohort.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jan.13179 
PMID: 27731953  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Geriatr Gerontol Int. 2017 Oct;17(10):1527-1533. doi: 10.1111/ggi.12910. Epub
2016 Sep 27.

Relationship between chronic kidney disease with diabetes or hypertension and
frailty in community-dwelling Japanese older adults.

Lee S(1), Lee S(1), Harada K(1)(2), Bae S(1), Makizako H(1), Doi T(1),
Tsutsumimoto K(1), Hotta R(1), Nakakubo S(1), Park H(1)(3), Suzuki T(1)(4),
Shimada H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Gerontology, Center for Gerontology and Social
Science, National Center for Geriatrics and Gerontology, Obu, Japan.
(2)Graduate School of Human Development and Environment, Kobe University, Japan.
(3)Department of Health Care and Science, Dong-A University, Busan, Korea.
(4)Institute for Aging and Development, J.F. Oberlin University, Tokyo, Japan.

AIM: The aim of the present study was to evaluate the relationship between kidney
function with concomitant diabetes or hypertension and frailty in
community-dwelling Japanese older adults.
METHODS: The participants were 9606 residents (community-dwelling Japanese older 
adults) who completed baseline assessments. The estimated glomerular filtration
rate (mL/min/1.73 m2 ) was determined according to the serum creatinine level,
and participants were classified into four mutually exclusive categories: ≥60.0
(normal range), 45.0-59.9, 30.0-44.9 and <30.0 mL/min/1.73 m2 . Frailty status
was defined using five criteria as described by Fried: slow gait speed, muscle
weakness, low physical activity, exhaustion and unintentional weight loss.
Participants who met three, four or five criteria satisfied the definition of
having frailty. Multivariate logistic regression was used to examine the
relationships between estimated glomerular filtration rate and frailty.
RESULTS: After multivariate adjustment, participants with lower kidney function
(estimated glomerular filtration rate <30.0 mL/min/1.73 m2 ) were more frail
(odds ratio [OR] 1.90, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.01-3.59). In addition,
individuals with a history of diabetes (OR 2.76, 95% CI 1.21-8.24) or
hypertension (OR 2.53, 95% CI 1.45-5.12) showed a significantly increased risk of
frailty in the lower kidney function group, regardless of multivariate controls. 
Furthermore, the analyses showed an even greater increase in the risk of frailty 
in patients with a history of both diabetes and hypertension (OR 3.67, 95% CI
1.13-14.1) CONCLUSIONS: A lower level of kidney function was associated with a
higher risk of frailty in community-dwelling Japanese older adults. Geriatr
Gerontol Int 2017; 17: 1527-1533.

© 2016 Japan Geriatrics Society.

DOI: 10.1111/ggi.12910 
PMID: 27670391  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Kidney Int. 2017 Jan;91(1):86-95. doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2016.07.039. Epub 2016 Sep 
22.

Ligand trap of the activin receptor type IIA inhibits osteoclast stimulation of
bone remodeling in diabetic mice with chronic kidney disease.

Sugatani T(1), Agapova OA(1), Fang Y(1), Berman AG(2), Wallace JM(2), Malluche
HH(3), Faugere MC(3), Smith W(4), Sung V(5), Hruska KA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Medicine, Renal Division, Washington University, 
St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Indiana University-Purdue University
Indianapolis, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.
(3)Division of Nephrology, Bone and Mineral Metabolism, Department of Medicine,
University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky, USA.
(4)Early Clinical Development, Celgene Corp., Basking Ridge, New Jersey, USA.
(5)Translational Medicine, Celgene Corp., San Francisco, California, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics and Medicine, Renal Division, Washington University, 
St. Louis, Missouri, USA. Electronic address: Hruska_k@kids.wustl.edu.

Comment in
    Kidney Int. 2017 Jan;91(1):11-13.

Dysregulation of skeletal remodeling is a component of renal osteodystrophy.
Previously, we showed that activin receptor signaling is differentially affected 
in various tissues in chronic kidney disease (CKD). We tested whether a ligand
trap for the activin receptor type 2A (RAP-011) is an effective treatment of the 
osteodystrophy of the CKD-mineral bone disorder. With a 70% reduction in the
glomerular filtration rate, CKD was induced at 14 weeks of age in the ldlr-/-
high fat-fed mouse model of atherosclerotic vascular calcification and diabetes. 
Twenty mice with CKD, hyperphosphatemia, hyperparathyroidism, and elevated
activin A were treated with RAP-011, wherease 19 mice were given vehicle twice
weekly from week 22 until the mice were killed at 28 weeks of age. The animals
were then evaluated by skeletal histomorphometry, micro-computed tomography,
mechanical strength testing, and ex vivo bone cell culture. Results in the CKD
groups were compared with those of the 16 sham-operated ldlr-/- high fat-fed
mice. Sham-operated mice had low-turnover osteodystrophy and skeletal frailty.
CKD stimulated bone remodeling with significant increases in osteoclast and
osteoblast numbers and bone resorption. Compared with mice with CKD
and sham-operated mice, RAP-011 treatment eliminated the CKD-induced increase in 
these histomorphometric parameters and increased trabecular bone fraction.
RAP-011 significantly increased cortical bone area and thickness. Activin
A-enhanced osteoclastogenesis was mediated through p-Smad2 association with c-fos
and activation of nuclear factor of activated T cells c1 (NFATc1). Thus, an
ActRIIA ligand trap reversed CKD-stimulated bone remodeling, likely through
inhibition of activin-A induced osteoclastogenesis.

Copyright © 2016 International Society of Nephrology. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.kint.2016.07.039 
PMCID: PMC5530394
PMID: 27666759  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Ann Epidemiol. 2016 Nov;26(11):773-779. doi: 10.1016/j.annepidem.2016.08.010.
Epub 2016 Aug 31.

Measuring senescence rates of patients with end-stage renal disease while
accounting for population heterogeneity: an analysis of data from the ERA-EDTA
Registry.

Koopman JJ(1), Kramer A(2), van Heemst D(3), Åsberg A(4), Beuscart JB(5),
Buturović-Ponikvar J(6), Collart F(7), Couchoud CG(8), Finne P(9), Heaf JG(10),
Massy ZA(11), De Meester JM(12), Palsson R(13), Steenkamp R(14), Traynor JP(15), 
Jager KJ(2), Putter H(16).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Gerontology and Geriatrics, Department of Internal Medicine, Leiden
University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. Electronic address:
j.j.e.koopman@lumc.nl.
(2)ERA-EDTA Registry, Department of Medical Informatics, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Section of Gerontology and Geriatrics, Department of Internal Medicine, Leiden
University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(4)Norwegian Renal Registry, Department of Transplant Medicine, Oslo University
Hospital-Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway.
(5)University of Lille, EA2694, Santé publique: épidémiologie et qualité des
soins, Lille, France; CHU Lille, Geriatric Department, Lille, France.
(6)Department of Nephrology, Ljubljana University Medical Center, Ljubljana,
Slovenia; Medical Faculty, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(7)Department of Nephrology and Dialysis, Brugmann University Hospital, Brussels,
Belgium.
(8)Renal Epidemiology and Information Network (REIN) Registry, French Biomedical 
Agency, Saint-Denis-la-Plaine, France.
(9)Finnish Registry for Kidney Diseases, Helsinki, Finland; Department of
Nephrology, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
(10)Department of Medicine, Zealand University Hospital, Roskilde, Denmark.
(11)Division of Nephrology, Ambroise Paré University Hospital, University of
Paris Ouest-Versailles-St-Quentin-en-Yvelines, Paris, France; Institut National
de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM) U1018, Research Centre in
Epidemiology and Population Health (CESP), Villejuif, France.
(12)Department of Nephrology, Dialysis, and Hypertension, AZ Nikolaas,
Sint-Niklaas, Belgium.
(13)Division of Nephrology, Landspitali-The National University Hospital of
Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland; Faculty of Medicine, School of Health Sciences,
University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland.
(14)UK Renal Registry, Southmead Hospital, Bristol, UK.
(15)The Scottish Renal Registry, Information Services Division Scotland, Glasgow,
UK.
(16)Department of Medical Statistics and Bioinformatics, Leiden University
Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.

PURPOSE: Although a population's senescence rate is classically measured as the
increase in mortality rate with age on a logarithmic scale, it may be more
accurately measured as the increase on a linear scale. Patients on dialysis, who 
suffer from accelerated senescence, exhibit a smaller increase in their mortality
rate on a logarithmic scale, but a larger increase on a linear scale than
patients with a functioning kidney transplant. However, this comparison may be
biased by population heterogeneity.
METHODS: Follow-up data on 323,308 patients on dialysis and 91,679 patients with 
a functioning kidney transplant were derived from the ERA-EDTA Registry. We
measured the increases in their mortality rates using Gompertz frailty models
that allow individual variation in this increase.
RESULTS: According to these models, the senescence rate measured as the increase 
in mortality rate on a logarithmic scale was smaller in patients on dialysis,
while the senescence rate measured as the increase on a linear scale was larger
in patients on dialysis than patients with a functioning kidney transplant.
CONCLUSIONS: Also when accounting for population heterogeneity, a population's
senescence rate is more accurately measured as the increase in mortality rate on 
a linear scale than a logarithmic scale.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.annepidem.2016.08.010 
PMID: 27665405  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Kidney Int. 2016 Dec;90(6):1342-1347. doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2016.07.027. Epub 2016 
Sep 18.

A single weekly Kt/Vurea target for peritoneal dialysis patients does not provide
an equal dialysis dose for all.

El-Kateb S(1), Sridharan S(2), Farrington K(3), Fan S(4), Davenport A(5).

Author information: 
(1)UCL Centre for Nephrology, Royal Free Hospital, University College London
Medical School, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Renal Unit, Lister Hospital, Stevenage SG1 4AB, United Kingdom.
(3)Renal Unit, Lister Hospital, Stevenage SG1 4AB, United Kingdom; University of 
Hertfordshire, Hatfield, United Kingdom.
(4)Barts Health NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom.
(5)UCL Centre for Nephrology, Royal Free Hospital, University College London
Medical School, London, United Kingdom. Electronic address:
andrewdavenport@nhs.net.

Dialysis adequacy is traditionally based on urea clearance, adjusted for total
body volume (Kt/Vurea), and clinical guidelines recommend a Kt/Vurea target for
peritoneal dialysis. We wished to determine whether adjusting dialysis dose by
resting and total energy expenditure would alter the delivered dialysis dose. The
resting and total energy expenditures were determined by equations based on
doubly labeled isotopic water studies and adjusted Kturea for resting energy
expenditure and total energy expenditure in 148 peritoneal dialysis patients
(mean age, 60.6 years; 97 male [65.5%]; 54 diabetic [36.5%]). The mean resting
energy expenditure was 1534 kcal/d, and the total energy expenditure was 1974
kcal/day. Using a weekly target Kt/V of 1.7, Kt was calculated using V measured
by bioimpedance and the significantly associated (r = 0.67) Watson equation for
total body water. Adjusting Kt for resting energy expenditure showed a reduced
delivered dialysis dose (ml/kcal per day) for women versus men (5.5 vs. 6.2), age
under versus over 65 years (5.6 vs. 6.4), weight <65 versus >80 kg (5.8 vs. 6.1),
low versus high comorbidity (5.9 vs. 6.2), all of which were significant.
Adjusting for the total energy expenditure showed significantly reduced dosing
for those employed versus not employed (4.3 vs. 4.8), a low versus high frailty
score (4.5 vs. 5.0) and nondiabetic versus diabetic (4.6 vs. 4.9). Thus, the
current paradigm for a single target Kt/Vurea for all peritoneal dialysis
patients does not take into account energy expenditure and metabolic rate and may
lead to lowered dialysis delivery for the younger, more active female patient.

Copyright © 2016 International Society of Nephrology. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.kint.2016.07.027 
PMID: 27653839  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Clin Interv Aging. 2016 Sep 2;11:1199-206. doi: 10.2147/CIA.S101902. eCollection 
2016.

Managing infective endocarditis in the elderly: new issues for an old disease.

Forestier E(1), Fraisse T(2), Roubaud-Baudron C(3), Selton-Suty C(4), Pagani
L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Diseases Department, Centre Hospitalier Métropole Savoie, Chambéry,
France.
(2)Acute Geriatric Department, Centre Hospitalier, Alès, France.
(3)Geriatric Department, University Hospital, Bordeaux, France.
(4)Department of Cardiology, University Hospital, Nancy, France.
(5)Infectious Diseases Department, Centre Hospitalier Annecy-Genevois, Annecy,
France.

The incidence of infective endocarditis (IE) rises in industrialized countries.
Older people are more affected by this severe disease, notably because of the
increasing number of invasive procedures and intracardiac devices implanted in
these patients. Peculiar clinical and echocardiographic features, microorganisms 
involved, and prognosis of IE in elderly have been underlined in several studies.
Additionally, elderly population appears quite heterogeneous, from healthy people
without past medical history to patients with multiple diseases or who are even
bedridden. However, the management of IE in this population has been poorly
explored, and international guidelines do not recommend adapting the therapeutic 
strategy to the patient's functional status and comorbidities. Yet, if IE should 
be treated according to current recommendations in the healthiest patients,
concerns may rise for older patients who suffer from several chronic diseases,
especially renal failure, and are on polypharmacy. Treating frailest patients
with high-dose intravenous antibiotics during a prolonged hospital stay as
recommended for younger patients could also expose them to functional decline and
toxic effect. Likewise, the place of surgery according to the aging
characteristics of each patient is unclear. The aim of this article is to review 
the recent data on epidemiology of IE and its peculiarities in the elderly. Then,
its management and various therapeutic approaches that can be considered
according to and beyond guidelines depending on patient comorbidities and frailty
are discussed.

DOI: 10.2147/CIA.S101902 
PMCID: PMC5015881
PMID: 27621607  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2016 Dec;81(6):1150-1155.

The impact of frailty on failure-to-rescue in geriatric trauma patients: A
prospective study.

Joseph B(1), Phelan H, Hassan A, Orouji Jokar T, O'Keeffe T, Azim A, Gries L,
Kulvatunyou N, Latifi R, Rhee P.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Surgery (B.J., A.H., T.O.J., T.O.K., A.A., L.G., N.K., 
R.L., P.R.), Division of Trauma, Critical Care, Burns and Emergency Surgery,
University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona; and Department of Surgery, Division of
Trauma, Critical Care, Burns, and Acute Care Surgery (H.P.), University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas.

INTRODUCTION: Failure-to-rescue (FTR) (defined as death from a major
complication) is considered as an index of hospital quality in trauma patients.
However, the role of frailty in FTR events remains unclear. We hypothesized that 
FTR rate is higher in elderly frail trauma patients.
METHODS: We performed a prospective cohort study of all elderly (age ≥ 65 years) 
trauma patients presenting at our level one trauma center. Patient's frailty
status was calculated utilizing the Trauma Specific Frailty Index (TSFI) within
24 hours of admission. Patients were stratified into non-frail, pre-frail, and
frail. FTR was defined as death from a major complication (respiratory,
infectious, cardiac, and renal). Binary logistic regression analysis was
performed after adjusting for age, gender, injury severity (ISS), and vital
parameters to assess the relationship between frailty status and FTR.
RESULTS: A total of 368 elderly trauma patients were evaluated of which 25% (n = 
93) were non-frail, 38% (n = 139) pre-frail, and 37% (n = 136) frail. Overall,
30% of the patients developed in-hospital complications; of them, mortality
occurred in 26% of the patients (FTR group). In the FTR group, 69% of the
patients were frail compared to 17% pre-frail and 14% non-frail (p = 0.002). On
multivariate regression analysis for predictors of FTR, frail status was an
independent predictor of FTR (OR [95% CI] = 2.67 [1.37-5.20]; p = 0.004). On
sensitivity analysis, positive predictive value of TSFI for FTR was 69% and
negative predictive value for FTR was 67%.
CONCLUSION: In elderly trauma patients, the presence of frailty increased the
odds of FTR almost threefold as compared to non-frail. Although FTR has been
considered as an indicator of health care quality, the findings of this study
suggest that frailty status independently contributes to FTR. This needs to be
considered in the future development of quality metrics, particularly in the case
of geriatric trauma patients.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Prognostic study, level II.

DOI: 10.1097/TA.0000000000001250 
PMID: 27602908  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Ann Thorac Surg. 2016 Oct;102(4):1172-80. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2016.07.001. 
Epub 2016 Sep 1.

Impact of Preoperative Chronic Kidney Disease in 2,531 High-Risk and Inoperable
Patients Undergoing Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement in the PARTNER Trial.

Thourani VH(1), Forcillo J(2), Beohar N(3), Doshi D(4), Parvataneni R(5), Ayele
GM(5), Kirtane AJ(6), Babaliaros V(2), Kodali S(6), Devireddy C(2), Szeto W(7),
Herrmann HC(7), Makkar R(8), Ailawadi G(9), Lim S(9), Maniar HS(10), Zajarias
A(10), Suri R(11), Tuzcu EM(11), Kapadia S(11), Svensson L(11), Condado J(2),
Jensen HA(2), Mack MJ(12), Leon MB(6).

Author information: 
(1)Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia. Electronic address:
vthoura@emory.edu.
(2)Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia.
(3)Columbia University Division of Cardiology, Mount Sinai Medical Center, Miami 
Beach, Florida.
(4)Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New York.
(5)Cardiovascular Research Foundation, New York, New York.
(6)Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New York; Cardiovascular
Research Foundation, New York, New York.
(7)University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(8)Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California.
(9)University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia.
(10)Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri.
(11)Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio.
(12)Baylor, Scott, and White Healthcare, Plano, Texas.

BACKGROUND: Although preoperative renal dysfunction (RD) is associated with
increased mortality and morbidity after surgical aortic valve replacement, its
impact on clinical outcomes after transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR)
is less defined.
METHODS: TAVR patients in the PARTNER (Placement of Aortic Transcatheter Valves) 
trial with a calculable glomerular filtration rate (GFR) using the Modification
of Diet in Renal Disease equation were included. Patients were divided into three
groups: GFR >60 mL/min (none/mild RD), GFR 31 to 60 mL/min (moderate RD), and GFR
≤30 mL/min (severe RD). Operative characteristics and clinical outcomes were
analyzed. Cox regression models were used to determine multivariable predictors
of 1-year all-cause mortality.
RESULTS: A total of 2,531 inoperable or high surgical risk patients from the
PARTNER trial and continued access registries had a calculable GFR level: 767
(30%) had normal renal function or mild RD, 1,473 (58%) had moderate RD, and 291 
(12%) presented with severe RD. The mean Society of Thoracic Surgeons Predicted
Risk of Mortality for the cohort was 11.5%, and it was highest in those with
severe RD (13.8%). Patients with severe RD were more often women with a higher
prevalence of diabetes. Patients with severe RD had the highest incidence of
30-day and 1-year all-cause mortality and rehospitalization. The 30-day rate of
death from any cause was 10.7% in the severe RD group versus 6.0% in the moderate
and mild RD groups (p = 0.01). The 1-year rate of death from any cause was 34.4% 
in the severe RD group versus 21.5% in the moderate RD and 20.8% in the none/mild
RD groups (adjusted hazard ratio [HR] 2.24, p < 0.0001 for severe versus
none/mild; adjusted HR 1.14, p = 0.24 for severe versus moderate). Other
significant predictors of 1-year all-cause mortality included lower body mass
index, frailty, the transapical approach, a lower ejection fraction,
oxygen-dependent chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, liver disease, and male
sex.
CONCLUSIONS: Preoperative severe RD is a significant predictor for 1-year
mortality in TAVR patients. Careful risk stratification by the heart team is
required in patients with severe preprocedural RD.

Copyright © 2016 The Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2016.07.001 
PMID: 27592092  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Nihon Rinsho. 2016 Sep;74(9):1531-1540.

Aging and kidney disease.

[Article in Japanese]

Wakino S, Itoh H.

Kidney is an energy-consuming organ and its function deteriorates according as
aging. Various mechanisms for cellular senescence and organ aging have an impact 
on the initiation and progression of CKD, which includes telomere attrition,
genomic instability, stem cell exhaustion, mitochondrial dysfunction, impaired
nutrient signaling, inactivation of Sirtuin or Klotho-mediated pathway and
renin-angiotensin system activation. Interventions in these pathways have
provided therapeutic strategy against CKD. On the other hand, renal dys-
function, in turn, affects human aging process. Because of this close
relationship between human aging process and CKD, aging phenotype, such as
frailty can be used as a clinical marker of the prognosis of CKD as well as of
other age-related diseases including cardio- vascular disease and type II
diabetes. Amelioration of this aging phenotype can provide a novel therapeutic
strategy against CKD for the purpose of providing CKD patients with suc- cessful 
aging.


PMID: 30557489 


193. World Neurosurg. 2016 Nov;95:548-555.e4. doi: 10.1016/j.wneu.2016.08.029. Epub
2016 Aug 18.

Development of a Metastatic Spinal Tumor Frailty Index (MSTFI) Using a Nationwide
Database and Its Association with Inpatient Morbidity, Mortality, and Length of
Stay After Spine Surgery.

De la Garza Ramos R(1), Goodwin CR(1), Jain A(2), Abu-Bonsrah N(1), Fisher CG(3),
Bettegowda C(1), Sciubba DM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(2)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(3)Divison of Spine, Department of Orthopaedics, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA. Electronic address: dsciubb1@jhmi.edu.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to develop a perioperative metastatic spinal
tumor frailty index (MSTFI) that could predict morbidity, mortality, and length
of stay.
METHODS: A large inpatient hospitalization database was searched from 2002 to
2011 to identify 4583 patients with spinal metastasis from breast (21.1%), lung
(34.1%), thyroid (3.8%), renal (19.9%), and prostate (21.1%) cancer who underwent
surgery. A multiple logistic regression model identified 9 independent parameters
that were used to construct the MSTFI: anemia, chronic lung disease,
coagulopathy, electrolyte abnormalities, pulmonary circulation disorders, renal
failure, malnutrition, emergent/urgent admission, and anterior/combined surgical 
approach. Patients with 0 points were categorized as "not frail," 1 as "mildly
frail," 2 as "moderately frail," and ≥3 as "severely frail."
RESULTS: The overall perioperative complication rate was 19.3% and in-patient
mortality was 3.0%. Compared with patients with no frailty, patients with
moderate frailty (odds ratio [OR] 5.15; 95% confidence interval [95% CI]
2.44-10.86), and severe frailty (OR 5.74; 95% CI 2.69-12.24) had significantly
increased odds of inpatient mortality (all P < 0.001). Similarly, patients with
mild frailty (OR 1.88; 95% CI 1.33-2.66), moderate frailty (OR 3.83; 95% CI
2.71-5.41), and severe frailty (OR 6.97; 95% CI 4.98-9.74) had significantly
increased odds of developing a major in-hospital complication (all P < 0.001).
Length of stay also increased significantly by MSTFI (P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: In surgically treated patients with spinal metastasis, certain
perioperative parameters may significantly predict the risk of major in-hospital 
complications and mortality.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2016.08.029 
PMID: 27544340  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2016 Oct 7;11(10):1882-1891. doi: 10.2215/CJN.01050116.
Epub 2016 Aug 10.

Supportive Care: Integration of Patient-Centered Kidney Care to Manage Symptoms
and Geriatric Syndromes.

Davison SN(1), Jassal SV(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology and Immunology, Department of Medicine, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada; and sara.davison@ualberta.ca.
(2)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, University Health Network,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Dialysis care is often associated with poor outcomes including low quality of
life (QOL). To improve patient-reported outcomes, incorporation of the patient's 
needs and perspective into the medical care they receive is essential. This
article provides a framework to help clinicians integrate symptom assessment and 
other measures such as QOL and frailty scores into a clinical approach to the
contemporary supportive care of patients with advanced CKD. This approach
involves (1) defining our understanding of kidney supportive care,
patient-centered dialysis, and palliative dialysis; (2) understanding and
recognizing common symptoms associated with advanced CKD; (3) discussing the
concepts of physical function, frailty, and QOL and their role in CKD; and (4)
identifying the structural and process barriers that may arise when
patient-centered dialysis is being introduced into clinical practice.

Copyright © 2016 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.2215/CJN.01050116 
PMCID: PMC5053783
PMID: 27510454  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Haematologica. 2016 Sep;101(9):1110-9. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2016.148189. Epub
2016 Jun 16.

Geriatric assessment in multiple myeloma patients: validation of the
International Myeloma Working Group (IMWG) score and comparison with other common
comorbidity scores.

Engelhardt M(1), Dold SM(2), Ihorst G(3), Zober A(2), Möller M(2), Reinhardt
H(2), Hieke S(4), Schumacher M(4), Wäsch R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine I, Hematology, Oncology & Stem Cell Transplantation,
Medical Center, Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, Germany
monika.engelhardt@uniklinik-freiburg.de.
(2)Department of Medicine I, Hematology, Oncology & Stem Cell Transplantation,
Medical Center, Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, Germany.
(3)Clinical Trials Unit, Medical Center, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Freiburg, Germany.
(4)Institute for Medical Biometry and Statistics, Medical Center, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Freiburg, Germany.

This first validation of the International Myeloma Working Group geriatric
assessment in 125 newly diagnosed multiple myeloma patients was performed using
the International Myeloma Working Group score based on age, the Charlson
Comorbidity Index and cognitive and physical conditions (Activities of Daily
Living / Instrumental Activities of Daily Living) to classify patients as fit,
intermediate-fit or frail. We verified the International Myeloma Working Group
score's impact on outcome, and whether additional tools complement it. Since our 
prior analyses determined renal, lung and Karnofsky performance impairment as
multivariate risks, and the inclusion of frailty, age and cytogenetics
complements this, we included the revised myeloma comorbidity index, the Charlson
Comorbidity Index, the Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation-Comorbidity Index and
the Kaplan-Feinstein Index in this assessment. Multivariate analysis confirmed
cytogenetics, Activities of Daily Living, Instrumental Activities of Daily Living
and the Charlson Comorbidity Index as risks: 3-year overall survival for fit,
intermediate-fit and frail patients was 91%, 77% and 47%, respectively. Using the
Charlson Comorbidity Index, the Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation-Comorbidity
Index, the Kaplan-Feinstein Index and the revised Myeloma Comorbidity Index
allowed us to define fit and frail patients with distinct progression-free and
overall survival rates, with the most pronounced differences evidenced via the
International Myeloma Working Group score, the Charlson Comorbidity Index and the
revised Myeloma Comorbidity Index. Since the Charlson Comorbidity Index is
included in the International Myeloma Working Group score, we propose the latter 
and the revised Myeloma Comorbidity Index for future frailty measurements. Both
are useful instruments for identifying myeloma patients with a geriatric risk
profile and have a strong prognostic value for functional decline and overall
survival. The study was registered as: (clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: 00003686).

Copyright© Ferrata Storti Foundation.

DOI: 10.3324/haematol.2016.148189 
PMCID: PMC5060028
PMID: 27479825  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Clin Kidney J. 2016 Aug;9(4):606-10. doi: 10.1093/ckj/sfw061. Epub 2016 Jul 11.

Discriminative value of frailty screening instruments in end-stage renal disease.

van Munster BC(1), Drost D(2), Kalf A(2), Vogtlander NP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatrics, Gelre Hospitals, Apeldoorn, The Netherlands;
Department of Medicine, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Geriatrics , Gelre Hospitals , Apeldoorn , The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology , Gelre Hospitals , Apeldoorn ,
The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Numerous frailty screening instruments are available, but their
applicability for identifying frailty in patients with end-stage renal disease
(ESRD) is unknown. We aimed to investigate the diagnostic accuracy of three
instruments used for frailty screening in an ESRD population.
METHODS: The study was conducted in 2013 in a teaching hospital in The
Netherlands and included patients receiving haemodialysis, peritoneal dialysis
and pre-dialysis care. We determined the sensitivity and specificity of three
screening instruments: the Groningen Frailty Indicator (GFI), the Identification 
of Seniors at Risk-Hospitalized Patients (ISAR-HP) and the
Veiligheidsmanagementsysteem (VMS), which is a safety management system for
vulnerable elderly patients. The Frailty Index was the gold standard used.
RESULTS: The prevalence of frailty was 37% in a total of 95 participants with
ESRD [mean age 65.2 years (SD 12.0), 57% male]. Frailty prevalence in
participants ≥65 years of age and <65 years of age was 44% and 28%, respectively 
(P = 0.11). Sensitivity and specificity for frailty of the GFI were 89% and 57%, 
respectively; ISAR-HP 83% and 77%, respectively; and VMS 77% and 67%,
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Although the GFI showed the highest sensitivity, it is not yet
possible to propose a firm choice for one of these screening instruments or
specific items due to the small scale of the study. Since there is a high
prevalence of frailty in ESRD patients, translation and testing of the
effectiveness of screening using the GFI in the prognostication and prevention of
development or deterioration of frailty in this population should be the next
step.

DOI: 10.1093/ckj/sfw061 
PMCID: PMC4957734
PMID: 27478606 


197. Semin Nephrol. 2016 Jul;36(4):305-18. doi: 10.1016/j.semnephrol.2016.05.007.

Consequences of CKD on Functioning.

Kittiskulnam P(1), Sheshadri A(2), Johansen KL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco
VA Medical Center, San Francisco, California; Department of Medicine,
Chulalongkorn University, King Chulalongkorn Memorial Hospital, Thai Red Cross
Society, Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Division of Nephrology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco
VA Medical Center, San Francisco, California.
(3)Division of Nephrology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco
VA Medical Center, San Francisco, California. Electronic address:
kirsten.johansen@ucsf.edu.

Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is highly prevalent in the United States and
throughout the world,(1) with approximately 13% of adults affected.(2) In
addition, according to recent estimates, almost half of patients with CKD stages 
3 to 5 are 70 years of age and older.(2) In the United States, the number of
prevalent end-stage renal disease cases continues to increase in patients older
than age 65. In light of the demographic characteristics of patients with CKD and
ESRD, there has been considerable focus on associations between CKD and
cardiovascular outcomes.(3) Until recently, less attention had been paid to other
consequences of CKD in general and among older individuals with CKD in
particular, but there is now solid evidence linking CKD with impairments of
physical function, cognitive function, and emotional function and quality of
life. This review summarizes available literature on these topics, focusing
specifically on physical functioning and frailty, cognitive function, emotional
health, including depression and anxiety, and health-related quality of life.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semnephrol.2016.05.007 
PMCID: PMC4967875
PMID: 27475661  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Semin Nephrol. 2016 Jul;36(4):273-82. doi: 10.1016/j.semnephrol.2016.05.004.

The Patterns, Risk Factors, and Prediction of Progression in Chronic Kidney
Disease: A Narrative Review.

Collister D(1), Ferguson T(1), Komenda P(1), Tangri N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada; Department
of Community Health Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada; Chronic
Disease Innovation Center, Seven Oaks General Hospital, Winnipeg, Canada.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada; Department
of Community Health Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada; Chronic
Disease Innovation Center, Seven Oaks General Hospital, Winnipeg, Canada.
Electronic address: ntangri@sogh.mb.ca.

Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is a global public health problem that is associated
with excess morbidity, mortality, and health resource utilization. The
progression of CKD is defined by a decrease in glomerular filtration rate and
leads to a variety of metabolic abnormalities including acidosis, hypertension,
anemia, and mineral bone disorder. Lower glomerular filtration rate also bears a 
strong relationship with an increased risk of cardiovascular events, end-stage
renal disease, and death. Patterns of CKD progression include linear and
nonlinear trajectories, but kidney function can remain stable for years in some
individuals. Addressing modifiable risk factors for the progression of CKD is
needed to attenuate its associated morbidity and mortality. Developing effective 
risk prediction models for CKD progression is critical to identify patients who
are more likely to benefit from interventions and more intensive monitoring.
Accurate risk-prediction algorithms permit systems to best align health care
resources with risk to maximize their effects and efficiency while guiding
overall decision making.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semnephrol.2016.05.004 
PMID: 27475658  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Transplantation. 2016 Oct;100(10):e55-65. doi: 10.1097/TP.0000000000001367.

Criteria for and Appropriateness of Renal Transplantation in Elderly Patients
With End-Stage Renal Disease: A Literature Review and Position Statement on
Behalf of the European Renal Association-European Dialysis and Transplant
Association Descartes Working Group and European Renal Best Practice.

Segall L(1), Nistor I, Pascual J, Mucsi I, Guirado L, Higgins R, Van Laecke S,
Oberbauer R, Van Biesen W, Abramowicz D, Gavrilovici C, Farrington K, Covic A.

Author information: 
(1)1 Nefrocare MS Dialysis Centre, Iaşi, Romania. 2 Nephrology Department, Dr. C.
I. Parhon Hospital, University of Medicine and Pharmacy Gr. T. Popa, Iaşi,
Romania. 3 European Renal Best Practice (ERBP), Ghent University Hospital, Ghent,
Belgium. 4 Department of Nephrology, Hospital del Mar, Barcelona, Spain. 5
Institut Mar for Medical Research, Barcelona, Spain. 6 Descartes Working Group of
ERA-EDTA, London, UK. 7 Division of Nephrology and Multiorgan Transplant Program,
University Health Network and University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada. 8 Unidad de
Trasplante Renal, Servicio de Nefrologia, Fundació Puigvert, Barcelona, Spain. 9 
University Hospital Coventry and Warwickshire and University of Warwick,
Coventry, United Kingdom. 10 Renal Division, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent,
Belgium. 11 Department of Nephrology and Dialysis, Medical University of Vienna, 
Vienna, Austria. 12 Nephrology Department, Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, 
Belgium. 13 Center for Health Policy and Ethics, "Gr.T. Popa" University of
Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania. 14 Renal Unit, Lister Hospital, Stevenage
UK and Centre for Clinical and Health Services Research, University of Herts,
United Kingdom.

During the last 20 years, waiting lists for renal transplantation (RT) have grown
significantly older. However, elderly patients (ie ≥65 years of age) are still
more rarely referred or accepted to waiting lists and, if enlisted, have less
chances of actually receiving a kidney allograft, than younger counterparts. In
this review, we looked at evidence for the benefits and risks of RT in the
elderly trying to answer the following questions: Should RT be advocated for
elderly patients? What should be the criteria to accept elderly patients on the
waiting list for RT? What strategies might be used to increase the rate of RT in 
waitlisted elderly candidates? For selected elderly patients, RT was shown to be 
superior to dialysis in terms of patient survival. Virtually all guidelines
recommend that patients should not be deemed ineligible for RT based on age
alone, although a short life expectancy generally might preclude RT. Concerning
the assessment of comorbidities in the elderly, special attention should be paid 
to cardiac evaluation and screening for malignancy. Comorbidity scores and
frailty assessment scales might help the decision making on eligibility.
Psychosocial issues should also be evaluated. To overcome the scarcity of organ
donors, elderly RT candidates should be encouraged to consider expanded criteria 
donors and living donors, as alternatives to deceased standard criteria donors.
It has been demonstrated that expanded criteria donor RT in patients 60 years or 
older is associated with higher survival rates than remaining on dialysis,
whereas living donor RT is superior to all other options.

DOI: 10.1097/TP.0000000000001367 
PMID: 27472096  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Z Gerontol Geriatr. 2016 Aug;49(6):477-82. doi: 10.1007/s00391-016-1117-y. Epub
2016 Jul 27.

[Electrolyte disturbances in geriatric patients with focus on hyponatremia].

[Article in German]

Grundmann F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Klinik II für Innere Medizin, Nephrologie, Rheumatologie, Diabetologie und
Allgemeine Innere Medizin, Uniklinik Köln, Kerpenerstr. 62, 50937, Köln,
Deutschland. franziska.grundmann@uk-koeln.de.

Disturbances of water and electrolyte balance are commonly encountered in older
patients due to a multitude of physiological changes and preexisting morbidities 
with hyponatremia being the most common disorder. Even mild chronic hyponatremia 
can lead to cognitive deficits and gait instability and is associated with an
increased rate of falls and fractures. Additionally, experimental and
epidemiological data suggest that hyponatremia promotes bone resorption and
therefore increases the risk of osteoporosis. Furthermore, osteoporosis and
sarcopenia can be stimulated by hypomagnesemia. Hypernatremia often only results 
in unspecific symptoms but the condition is associated with a clearly increased
mortality. As electrolyte disturbances have a high prevalence in the geriatric
population and can contribute to geriatric syndromes and frailty, relevant
electrolyte alterations should be excluded in all geriatric patients, in
particular after a change in medication schedules.

DOI: 10.1007/s00391-016-1117-y 
PMID: 27464739  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

201. Z Gerontol Geriatr. 2016 Aug;49(6):469-76. doi: 10.1007/s00391-016-1109-y. Epub
2016 Jul 25.

[Decline in renal function in old age : Part of physiological aging versus
age-related disease].

[Article in German]

Braun F(1), Brinkkötter PT(2).

Author information: 
(1)Klinik II für Innere Medizin: Nephrologie, Rheumatologie, Diabetologie und
Allgemeine Innere Medizin, Uniklinik Köln, Kerpener Str. 62, Köln, 50937,
Deutschland.
(2)Klinik II für Innere Medizin: Nephrologie, Rheumatologie, Diabetologie und
Allgemeine Innere Medizin, Uniklinik Köln, Kerpener Str. 62, Köln, 50937,
Deutschland. paul.brinkkoetter@uk-koeln.de.

The incidence and prevalence of chronic renal disease (CKD) in elderly patients
are continuously increasing worldwide. Loss of renal function is not only
considered to be part of the aging process itself but also reflects the
multimorbidity of many geriatric patients. Calculating the glomerular filtration 
rate using specific algorithms validated for the elderly population and measuring
the amount of proteinuria allow an estimation of renal function in elderly
patients with high accuracy. Chronic renal failure has many clinical consequences
and not only results in a delayed excretion of toxins cleared by the kidneys but 
also affects hematogenesis, water and electrolyte balance as well as mineral bone
metabolism. Furthermore, CKD directly leads to and aggravates geriatric syndromes
and in particular the onset of frailty. Therapeutic strategies to halt
progression of CKD not only comprise treatment of the underlying disease but also
efficient blood pressure and diabetic control and the avoidance of nephrotoxic
medications.

DOI: 10.1007/s00391-016-1109-y 
PMID: 27457360  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Int J Cardiol. 2016 Oct 15;221:385-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2016.07.049. Epub
2016 Jul 5.

Unprotected left main intervention for surgery-ineligible patients with coronary 
artery disease-Usefulness of micro-CT images for stent.

Sueta D(1), Arima Y(2), Hokimoto S(3), Mukunoki T(4), Tabata N(1), Akasaka T(1), 
Sato T(4), Otani J(4), Ogawa H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan.
(2)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan; X-Earth Center, Graduate School of Science 
and Technology, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan.
(3)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan; X-Earth Center, Graduate School of Science 
and Technology, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan. Electronic address:
shokimot@kumamoto-u.ac.jp.
(4)X-Earth Center, Graduate School of Science and Technology, Kumamoto
University, Kumamoto, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) for unprotected left main
truncus (LMT) lesions is controversial. Inoperable status with advanced age,
renal dysfunction, frailty, or patient request may require an unprotected left
main PCI. PCI for LMT is not recommended in the typical clinical situation;
however, when it is the only feasible option, the performance is not bad. We
demonstrated the result of a cobalt-chromium everolimus-eluting stent (CoCr-EES) 
in the LMT stenting and serial changes via micro-computed tomography (μCT). μCT
is an established imaging technique used for high-resolution, non-destructive
assessment of vascular samples. The technique has drawn increasing interest for
investigations of atherosclerotic arteries in both humans and animal models.
There are no reports regarding the linkage between clinical results and μCT
images.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Between January 2009 and December 2014, we recruited 118
consecutive, unprotected LMT stenting cases in our institution. We examined the
clinical outcomes and angiographic results with a CoCr-EES compared with a
first-generation drug-eluting stent. The primary endpoint of this registry was
the rate of one-year major adverse cardiac events (MACE). The one-year MACE rate 
was 2.54%; this did not include the CoCr-EES. We established LMT bifurcation
models (mini-crush and culotte) using a CoCr-EES and obtained μCT images of the
CoCr-EES. The images showed no deformation or strut apposition.
CONCLUSION: CoCr-EES performed well in LMT in our institution and according to
μCT. μCT images may be useful for anatomical simulation in stent deployment.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2016.07.049 
PMID: 27404711  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Int J Cardiol. 2016 Oct 1;220:761-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2016.06.089. Epub 2016
Jun 23.

Invasive strategy in non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndrome: What
should be the benchmark target in the real world patients? Insights from BLITZ-4 
Quality Campaign.

Olivari Z(1), Chinaglia A(2), Gonzini L(3), Falsini G(4), Pilleri A(5), Valente
S(6), Gregori G(7), Rollo R(8), My L(9), Scrimieri P(10), Lanzillo T(11), Corrado
L(12), Chiti M(13), Picardi E(2); BLITZ 4 Investigators.

Author information: 
(1)UOC Cardiologia, Ospedale Cà Foncello, Treviso, Italy. Electronic address:
zolivari@ulss.tv.it.
(2)SC Cardiologia, Ospedale Maria Vittoria, Turin, Italy.
(3)ANMCO Research Center, Florence, Italy.
(4)UO Cardiologia, Ospedale San Donato, Arezzo, Italy.
(5)SC Cardiologia, Azienda Ospedaliera G. Brotzu, Cagliari, Italy.
(6)Clinica Cardiologia Gen. Interventistica, AOU Careggi, Firenze, Italy.
(7)SC Cardiologia, Ospedale Gen.le Prov.le C.G. Mazzoni, Ascoli Piceno, Italy.
(8)UOC Cardiologia, Ospedale Perrino, Brindisi, Italy.
(9)Cardiologia, Casa di Cura Villa Verde, Taranto, Italy.
(10)UOC Cardiologia UTIC Emodinamica, Ospedale Belcolle, Viterbo, Italy.
(11)UO Cardiologia-UTIC, AORN Giuseppe Moscati, Avellino, Italy.
(12)SC Cardiologia, Ospedale Sant'Andrea, Vercelli, Italy.
(13)UO Cardiologia, Ospedale San Jacopo, Pistoia, Italy.

AIMS: To define a benchmark target for an invasive strategy (IS) rate appropriate
for performance assessment in intermediate-to-high risk non-ST-segment elevation 
acute coronary syndromes (NSTE-ACS).
METHODS AND RESULTS: During the BLITZ-4 campaign, which aimed at improving the
quality of care in 163 Italian coronary care units, 4923/5786 (85.1%) of
consecutive patients admitted with NSTE-ACS with troponin elevation and/or
dynamic ST-T changes on the electrocardiogram were managed with IS. The reasons
driving the choice (RDC) for a conservative strategy (CS) in the remaining 863
patients were prospectively recorded. In 33.8%, CS was mandatory because of
patients refusal, known coronary anatomy or death before coronary angiography; in
52.8% it was clinically justified because of active stroke, bleeding, advanced
frailty, severe comorbidities, contraindication to antiplatelet therapy or
because they were considered to be at low risk; only in 13.4% the reasons, such
as renal failure, advanced age or other, were less stringent. As compared to
patients undergoing IS, those in the CS were 12years older and had significantly 
more severe comorbidities. The in-hospital and 6-month all-cause mortality were
9.0% vs 0.9% and 22.0% vs 3.9% in CS and IS groups respectively (p<0.0001 for
both).
CONCLUSION: As the RDC for CS were clinically correct in vast majority of cases
the observed 85% invasive strategy rate may be considered as the desirable
benchmark target in patients with NSTE-ACS. For the same reason, it remains
questionable if the higher rate of IS could have improved the prognosis in CS
patients, despite their highly unfavorable prognosis.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2016.06.089 
PMID: 27393863  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Int J Surg Case Rep. 2016;25:167-70. doi: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2016.06.033. Epub 2016 
Jun 23.

A rare case of ischaemic pneumatosis intestinalis and hepatic portal venous gas
in an elderly patient with good outcome following conservative management.

Nevins EJ(1), Moori P(2), Ward CS(3), Murphy K(3), Elmes CE(3), Taylor JV(3).

Author information: 
(1)Emergency General Surgery and Trauma Unit, University Hospital Aintree,
Liverpool, England L9 7AL, United Kingdom. Electronic address:
dr.e.nevins@gmail.com.
(2)University of Liverpool Medical School, Liverpool, England L69 3BX, United
Kingdom.
(3)Emergency General Surgery and Trauma Unit, University Hospital Aintree,
Liverpool, England L9 7AL, United Kingdom.

INTRODUCTION: Pneumatosis intestinalis (PI) and hepatic portal venous gas (HPVG) 
are typically associated and are likely to represent a spectrum of the same
disease. The causes of both entities range from benign to life-threatening
conditions. Ischaemic causes are known to be fatal without emergency surgical
intervention.
PRESENTATION OF CASE: In this case a 93year old male experienced acute abdominal 
pain radiating to his back, with nausea and vomiting and a 2-week history of
altered bowel habit. Examination revealed abdominal tenderness and distension. He
had deranged white cell count (WCC) and renal function. Computed tomography (CT) 
revealed PI with associated HPVG. The cause was due to ischaemic pathology. The
patient was managed conservatively with antibiotics and was discharged 7days
later with resolution of his abdominal pain and WCC.
DISCUSSION: The pathogenesis of HPVG secondary to PI is poorly understood but
usually indicates intestinal ischaemia, thought to carry a mortality of around
75%. HPVG in the older patient usually necessitates emergency surgery however
this is not always in the patient's best interest.
CONCLUSION: There are few reported cases of patient survival following
conservative management of PI and HPVG secondary to ischaemic pathology. This
case demonstrates the possibility of managing this condition without aggressive
surgical intervention especially when surgery would likely result in mortality
due to frailty and morbidity. Further work is required to identify suitable
patients.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2016.06.033 
PMCID: PMC4932613
PMID: 27376775 


205. JAMA Intern Med. 2016 Aug 1;176(8):1095-102. doi:
10.1001/jamainternmed.2016.1200.

Quality of End-of-Life Care Provided to Patients With Different Serious
Illnesses.

Wachterman MW(1), Pilver C(2), Smith D(3), Ersek M(4), Lipsitz SR(5), Keating
NL(6).

Author information: 
(1)Section of General Internal Medicine, VA Boston Healthcare System, Boston,
Massachusetts2Division of General Internal Medicine, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts3Department of Psychosocial Oncology and
Palliative Care, Dana Farber Cancer.
(2)Center for Healthcare Organization and Implementation Research, VA Boston
Healthcare System, Boston, Massachusetts5Tufts Health Plan, Watertown,
Massachusetts.
(3)Center for Health Equity Research and Promotion, Department of Veterans
Affairs Medical Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(4)Center for Health Equity Research and Promotion, Department of Veterans
Affairs Medical Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania7University of Pennsylvania
School of Nursing, Philadelphia.
(5)Division of General Internal Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts.
(6)Division of General Internal Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts8Department of Health Care Policy, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts.

Comment in
    JAMA Intern Med. 2016 Aug 1;176(8):1102-4.
    Am J Kidney Dis. 2017 May;69(5):564-567.

IMPORTANCE: Efforts to improve end-of-life care have focused primarily on
patients with cancer. High-quality end-of-life care is also critical for patients
with other illnesses.
OBJECTIVE: To compare patterns of end-of-life care and family-rated quality of
care for patients dying with different serious illnesses.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: A retrospective cross-sectional study was
conducted in all 146 inpatient facilities within the Veteran Affairs health
system among patients who died in inpatient facilities between October 1, 2009,
and September 30, 2012, with clinical diagnoses categorized as end-stage renal
disease (ESRD), cancer, cardiopulmonary failure (congestive heart failure or
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease), dementia, frailty, or other conditions.
Data analysis was conducted from April 1, 2014, to February 10, 2016.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Palliative care consultations, do-not-resuscitate
orders, death in inpatient hospices, death in the intensive care unit, and
family-reported quality of end-of-life care.
RESULTS: Among 57 753 decedents, approximately half of the patients with ESRD,
cardiopulmonary failure, or frailty received palliative care consultations
(adjusted proportions, 50.4%, 46.7%, and 43.7%, respectively) vs 73.5% of
patients with cancer and 61.4% of patients with dementia (P < .001).
Approximately one-third of patients with ESRD, cardiopulmonary failure, or
frailty (adjusted proportions, 32.3%, 34.1%, and 35.2%, respectively) died in the
intensive care unit, more than double the rates among patients with cancer and
those with dementia (13.4% and 8.9%, respectively) (P < .001). Rates of excellent
quality of end-of-life care reported by 34 005 decedents' families were similar
for patients with cancer and those with dementia (adjusted proportions, 59.2% and
59.3%; P = .61), but lower for patients with ESRD, cardiopulmonary failure, or
frailty (54.8%, 54.8%, and 53.7%, respectively; all P ≤ .02 vs patients with
cancer). This quality advantage was mediated by palliative care consultation,
setting of death, and a code status of do-not-resuscitate; adjustment for these
variables rendered the association between diagnosis and overall end-of-life care
quality nonsignificant.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Family-reported quality of end-of-life care was
significantly better for patients with cancer and those with dementia than for
patients with ESRD, cardiopulmonary failure, or frailty, largely owing to higher 
rates of palliative care consultation and do-not-resuscitate orders and fewer
deaths in the intensive care unit among patients with cancer and those with
dementia. Increasing access to palliative care and goals of care discussions that
address code status and preferred setting of death, particularly for patients
with end-organ failure and frailty, may improve the overall quality of
end-of-life care for Americans dying of these illnesses.

DOI: 10.1001/jamainternmed.2016.1200 
PMCID: PMC5470549
PMID: 27367547  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Liver Transpl. 2016 Oct;22(10):1324-32. doi: 10.1002/lt.24506.

The gap between clinically assessed physical performance and objective physical
activity in liver transplant candidates.

Dunn MA(1)(2), Josbeno DA(3), Schmotzer AR(4)(5), Tevar AD(5)(6), DiMartini
AF(5)(7), Landsittel DP(5)(8), Delitto A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Liver Diseases, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
dunnma@upmc.edu.
(2)Thomas E. Starzl Transplantation Institute, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA. dunnma@upmc.edu.
(3)Department of Physical Therapy, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
(4)Center for Liver Diseases, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
(5)Thomas E. Starzl Transplantation Institute, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA.
(6)Department of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
(7)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
(8)Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

Frailty with sarcopenia in cirrhosis causes liver transplant wait-list attrition 
and deaths. Regular physical activity is needed to protect patients with
cirrhosis from frailty. We subjectively assess physical performance in selecting 
patients for transplant listing, but we do not know whether clinical assessments 
reflect the extent of activity patients actually perform. To investigate this
question, 53 wait-listed patients self-assessed their performance of ordinary
physical tasks using the Rosow-Breslau survey, and clinicians assessed their
physical performance status with the Karnofsky index. We compared these
assessments with actual activity measured using an accelerometer/thermal sensing 
armband worn from 4 to 7 days. We found that their measured activity was among
the lowest reported in chronic disease, similar to that of patients with advanced
chronic pulmonary disease or renal failure. Their percentages of waking hours
spent in sedentary, light, and moderate-vigorous activity were 75.9% ± 18.9%,
18.9% ± 14.3%, and 4.9% ± 6.9%, respectively. Higher mean sedentary and lower
mean moderate-vigorous activity was significantly associated with 9 wait-list
deaths (P = 0.004). Compared with a range of 7000-13,000 steps/day in healthy
adults, patients' mean steps/day were 3164 ± 2842. Both their activity percentage
and step data were typical of other severely inactive populations. Neither their 
Rosow-Breslau scores (mean 2.3 ± 0.8, maximum 3.0) nor their Karnofsky scores
(mean 79 ± 12, maximum 100) suggested major impairment or showed a correlation
with patients' actual physical performance. In conclusion, physical activity in
patients with cirrhosis wait-listed for transplantation is highly sedentary.
Self-assessments and provider assessments of physical activity do not reliably
indicate actual performance. Whether the gap between assessed and actual
performance may be favorably modified by interventions to improve activity and
ameliorate frailty merits further study. Liver Transplantation 22 1324-1332 2016 
AASLD.

© 2016 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/lt.24506 
PMID: 27348200  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2016 Sep 7;11(9):1624-39. doi: 10.2215/CJN.13611215. Epub 
2016 Jun 24.

Functional and Cognitive Impairment, Frailty, and Adverse Health Outcomes in
Older Patients Reaching ESRD-A Systematic Review.

Kallenberg MH(1), Kleinveld HA(2), Dekker FW(3), van Munster BC(4), Rabelink
TJ(2), van Buren M(5), Mooijaart SP(6).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Nephrology, Gerontology and Geriatrics, and
m.h.kallenberg@lumc.nl.
(2)Departments of Nephrology.
(3)Epidemiology, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, The Netherlands;
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, University Medical Centre Groningen,
Groningen, The Netherlands; Department of Geriatrics, Gelre Hospitals, Apeldoorn,
The Netherlands;
(5)Departments of Nephrology, Department of Nephrology, Haga Hospital, The Hague,
The Netherlands; and.
(6)Gerontology and Geriatrics, and Institute for Evidence-Based Medicine in Old
Age, Leiden, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Older patients reaching ESRD have a higher risk of
adverse health outcomes. We aimed to determine the association of functional and 
cognitive impairment and frailty with adverse health outcomes in patients
reaching ESRD. Understanding these associations could ultimately lead to
prediction models to guide tailored treatment decisions or preventive
interventions.
DESIGN, SETTING, PARTICIPANTS, & MEASUREMENTS: We searched MEDLINE, Embase, Web
of Science, CENTRAL, CINAHL, PsycINFO, and COCHRANE for original studies
published until February 8, 2016 reporting on the association of functional or
cognitive impairment or frailty with adverse health outcome after follow-up in
patients reaching ESRD either with or without RRT.
RESULTS: Of 7451 identified citations, we included 30 articles that reported on
35 associations. Mean age was >60 years old in 73% of the studies, and geriatric 
conditions were highly prevalent. Twenty-four studies (80%) reported on
functional impairment, seven (23%) reported on cognitive impairment, and four
(13%) reported on frailty. Mortality was the main outcome measure in 29 studies
(97%), and one study assessed functional status trajectory. In 34 of 35 (97%)
associations reported, functional or cognitive impairment or frailty was
significantly and independently associated with adverse health outcomes. The
majority of studies (83%) were conducted in selected patient populations, mainly 
patients on incident dialysis.
CONCLUSIONS: Functional and cognitive impairment and frailty in patients reaching
ESRD are highly prevalent and strongly and independently associated with adverse 
health outcomes, and they may, therefore, be useful for risk stratification. More
research into their prognostic value is needed.

Copyright © 2016 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.2215/CJN.13611215 
PMCID: PMC5012494
PMID: 27342598  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Postepy Hig Med Dosw (Online). 2016 Jun 8;70(0):581-9.

Geriatric syndromes in patients with chronic kidney disease.

Gołębiowski T(1), Augustyniak-Bartosik H(1), Weyde W(2), Klinger M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Katedra i Klinika Nefrologii i Medycyny Transplantacyjnej Uniwersytet Medyczny
we Wrocławiu.
(2)Katedra i Klinika Nefrologii i Medycyny Transplantacyjnej Uniwersytet Medyczny
we Wrocławiu; Wydział Stomatologiczny, Uniwersytet Medyczny we Wrocławiu.

The recent epidemiologic data pointed out, that the general number of patients on
hemodialysis is steadily increasing, especially in group of elderly patients over
75 years old. The geriatric syndromes are a multietiological disorder related to 
physiological aging and partly associated with comorbid conditions. Frailty,
falls, functional decline and disability, cognitive impairment and depression are
main geriatric syndromes and occurs in patients with impaired renal function more
often than among general population. The causes of higher prevalence of those
syndromes are not well known, but uremic environment and overall renal
replacement therapy may have an important impact on its progress. The patient
with geriatric syndrome require comprehensive treatment as well as physical
rehabilitation, psychiatric cure and support in everyday activities. Herein below
we would like to review recent literature regarding to particular features of
main geriatric syndromes in a group of nephrological patients.


PMID: 27333928  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2016 Sep;31(9):1531-40. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfv463. Epub
2016 Feb 4.

'I feel stronger and younger all the time'-perspectives of elderly kidney
transplant recipients: thematic synthesis of qualitative research.

Pinter J(1), Hanson CS(1), Craig JC(1), Chapman JR(2), Budde K(3), Halleck F(3), 
Tong A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sydney School of Public Health, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006,
Australia Centre for Kidney Research, Children's Hospital at Westmead, Westmead, 
NSW, Australia.
(2)Centre for Transplant and Renal Research, Westmead Hospital, Westmead, NSW,
Australia.
(3)Department of Nephrology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Kidney transplantation offers improved survival and quality of life
to an increasing number of elderly patients with end-stage kidney disease.
However, elderly kidney transplant recipients may face unique challenges due to a
higher burden of comorbidity, greater cumulative risk of
immunosuppression-related complications and increasing frailty. We aimed to
describe the perspectives of elderly kidney transplant recipients.
METHODS: Electronic databases were searched to April 2015. Qualitative studies
were eligible if they reported views from elderly kidney transplant recipients
(≥60 years). Thematic synthesis was used to analyse the findings.
RESULTS: Twenty-one studies involving >116 recipients were included. We
identified seven themes. 'Regaining strength and vitality' meant valuing the
physical and psychosocial improvements in daily functioning and life
participation. 'Extending life' was the willingness to accept any organ,
including extended criteria kidneys, to prolong survival. 'Debt of gratitude'
entailed conscious appreciation toward their donor while knowing they were unable
to repay their sacrifice. 'Moral responsibility to maintain health' motivated
adherence to medication and lifestyle recommendations out of an ethical duty to
protect their gift for graft survival. 'Unabating and worsening forgetfulness'
hindered self-management. 'Disillusionment with side effects and complications'
reflected disappointment and exasperation with the unintended consequences of
medications. 'Finality of treatment option' was an acute awareness that the
current transplant may be their last.
CONCLUSIONS: Kidney transplantation was perceived to slow and even reverse the
experience of aging among elderly recipients, especially compared with dialysis. 
However, some were frustrated over persistent limitations after transplant,
struggled with the burden of medication side effects and worried about a possible
return to dialysis if the transplant failed. Clarifying patient expectations of
transplantation, providing support to alleviate the debilitating impacts of
immunosuppression and addressing fears about deteriorating health and graft
failure may improve satisfaction and outcomes in elderly kidney transplant
recipients.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of ERA-EDTA.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1093/ndt/gfv463 
PMID: 27333617  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


210. PeerJ. 2016 Jun 14;4:e2122. doi: 10.7717/peerj.2122. eCollection 2016.

Geriatric syndromes are potential determinants of the medication adherence status
in prevalent dialysis patients.

Chao CT(1), Huang JW(2); COGENT (COhort of GEriatric Nephrology in NTUH) study
group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital Jinshan Branch,
New Taipei City, Taiwan; Graduate Institute of Toxicology, National Taiwan
University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Internal Medicine, 
National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital , Taipei 
, Taiwan.

Background. Geriatric syndromes (GS) exhibit high prevalence in patients with
end-stage renal disease (ESRD) under chronic dialysis irrespective of age. We
sought to determine whether GS influences medication adherence in ESRD patients. 
Methods. A prospective cohort of chronic dialysis patients was assembled. The
presence of GS components, including frailty/prefrailty, polypharmacy, and
malnutrition, were ascertained through a validated questionnaire, electronic
records and chart abstraction, and laboratory tests. The severity of medication
non-adherence was defined using the eight-item Morisky Medication Adherence Scale
(MMAS). Multiple logistic regression analysis was performed targeting MMAS
results and incorporating relevant clinical features and GS. Results. The
prevalence of frailty/pre-frailty, polypharmacy, and hypoalbuminemia/
malnutrition among the enrolled participants was 66.7%, 94%, and 14%,
respectively. The average MMAS scores in these dialysis patients were 2 ± 1.7
(range, 0-6), with only 15.7% exhibiting high medication adherence. Multiple
regression analyses showed that the absence of frailty/pre-frailty (P = 0.01)
were significantly associated with poorer medication adherence, while the
presence of polypharmacy (P = 0.02) and lower serum albumin, a potential sign of 
malnutrition (P = 0.03), were associated with poor adherence in another model.
Conclusion. This study is among the very few reports addressing GS and medication
adherence, especially in ESRD patients. Interventions targeting frailty,
polypharmacy, and malnutrition might potentially improve the medication
non-adherence and symptom control in these pill-burdened patients.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.2122 
PMCID: PMC4911948
PMID: 27326380 


211. Nephrol Ther. 2016 Jul;12(4):193-7. doi: 10.1016/j.nephro.2016.01.016. Epub 2016 
Jun 16.

[Peritoneal dialysis for acute renal failure: Rediscovery of an old modality of
renal replacement therapy].

[Article in French]

Issad B(1), Rostoker G(2), Bagnis C(3), Deray G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Département d'urologie et de néphrologie, service de néphrologie, groupe
hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, 47/83, boulevard de l'Hôpital, 75013 Paris,
France. Electronic address: belkacem.issad@psl.aphp.fr.
(2)Service de néphrologie et de dialyse, hôpital privé Claude Galien, 20, route
de Boussy, 91480 Quincy-sous-Sénart, France.
(3)Département d'urologie et de néphrologie, service de néphrologie, groupe
hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, 47/83, boulevard de l'Hôpital, 75013 Paris,
France.

Acute renal failure (ARF) in adults in the intensive care unit (ICU) often
evolves in a context of multiple organ failure, which explains the high mortality
rate and increase treatment needs. Among, two modalities of renal replacement
therapy, peritoneal dialysis (PD) was the first modality used for the treatment
of ARF in the 1950s. Today, while PD is generalized for chronic renal failure
treatment, its use in the ICU is limited, particularly, due to the advent of new 
hemodialysis techniques and the development of continuous replacement therapy.
Recently, a renewed interest in the use of PD in patients with ARF has manifested
in several emerging countries (Brazil, Vietnam). A systematic review in 2013
showed a similar mortality in ARF patients having PD (58%) and those treated by
hemodialysis or hemodiafiltration/hemofiltration (56.1%). In the International
society of peritoneal dialysis (ISPD)'s guideline (2013), PD may be used in adult
ARF as the other blood extracorporeal epuration technics (recommendation with
grade 1B). PD is the preferred method in cardiorenal syndromes, in frailty
patients with hemodynamic instability and those lacking vascular access; finally 
PD is also an option in elderly and patients with bleeding tendency. In
industrial countries, high volume automated PD with a flexible catheter (usually 
Tenckhoff) is advocated.

Copyright © 2016 Association Société de néphrologie. Published by Elsevier SAS.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nephro.2016.01.016 
PMID: 27318887  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Ann Vasc Surg. 2016 Aug;35:19-29. doi: 10.1016/j.avsg.2016.01.052. Epub 2016 Jun 
2.

Preoperative Frailty Increases Risk of Nonhome Discharge after Elective Vascular 
Surgery in Home-Dwelling Patients.

Arya S(1), Long CA(2), Brahmbhatt R(2), Shafii S(2), Brewster LP(3), Veeraswamy
R(2), Johnson TM 2nd(4), Johanning JM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Vascular Surgery, Department of Surgery, Emory University School
of Medicine, Atlanta, GA; Surgical Service Line, Atlanta VA Medical Center,
Decatur, GA. Electronic address: shipra.arya@emory.edu.
(2)Division of Vascular Surgery, Department of Surgery, Emory University School
of Medicine, Atlanta, GA.
(3)Division of Vascular Surgery, Department of Surgery, Emory University School
of Medicine, Atlanta, GA; Surgical Service Line, Atlanta VA Medical Center,
Decatur, GA.
(4)Division of General Medicine and Geriatrics, Department of Medicine, Emory
University School of Medicine.
(5)Division of Vascular Surgery, Department of Surgery, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, NE.

BACKGROUND: Patient-centered quality outcomes such as disposition after surgery
are increasingly being scrutinized. Preoperative factors predictive of nonhome
discharge (DC) may identify at-risk patients for targeted interventions. This
study examines the association among preoperative risk factors, frailty, and
nonhome DC after elective vascular surgery procedures in patients living at home.
METHODS: The 2011-2012 National Surgical Quality Improvement Project database was
queried to identify all home-dwelling patients who underwent elective vascular
procedures (endovascular and open aortic aneurysm repair, suprainguinal and
infrainguinal bypasses, peripheral endovascular interventions, carotid
endarterectomy, and stent). Preoperative frailty was measured using the modified 
frailty index (mFI; derived from Canadian Study of Health and Aging). Univariate 
and multivariate logistic regression analysis was performed to examine the
association of frailty and nonhome DC.
RESULTS: Of 15,843 home-dwelling patients, 1,177 patients (7.4%) did not return
home postoperatively. Frailty (mFI > 0.25) conferred a significantly increased
2-fold risk of nonhome DC disposition for each procedure type. Frailty, female
gender, open procedures, increasing age, end-stage renal disease, and occurrence 
of any postoperative complication were associated with increased risk of nonhome 
DC. On multivariate logistic regression analysis, frailty increased the odds of
nonhome DC by 60% (odds ratio 1.6, 95% confidence interval 1.4-1.8) after
adjusting for other covariates. In the presence of complications, the risk of
nonhome DC was 27.5% in frail versus 16.5% in nonfrail patients (P < 0.001). In
the absence of complications, although absolute risk was lower, frail patients
were nearly twice as likely to not return home (frail 5.5% vs. nonfrail 2.75%,
P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Frail home-dwelling patients undergoing elective vascular procedures
are at high risk of not returning home after surgery. Preoperative frailty
assessment appears to hold potential for counseling regarding postsurgery
disposition and DC planning.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.avsg.2016.01.052 
PMID: 27263810  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Nefrologia. 2016 Nov - Dec;36(6):609-615. doi: 10.1016/j.nefro.2016.03.020. Epub 
2016 May 27.

Frailty in elderly people with chronic kidney disease.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Portilla Franco ME(1), Tornero Molina F(2), Gil Gregorio P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Geriatría, Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, España. Electronic
address: maeportilla@gmail.com.
(2)Servicio de Nefrología, Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, España.
(3)Servicio de Geriatría, Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, España.

In recent years, the concept of frailty as a "state of pre-disability" has been
widely accepted by those involved in the care of the elderly. Its importance lies
not only in its high prevalence - more than 25% in people over 85 years of age - 
but it is also considered an independent risk factor of disability,
institutionalisation and mortality amongst the elderly. The study of renal
function is relevant in patients with major comorbidities. Studies have shown a
significant association between chronic kidney disease and the development of
adverse clinical outcomes such as heart disease, heart failure, end-stage renal
disease, increased susceptibility to infections and greater functional
impairment. Frailty can be reversed, which is why a study of frailty in patients 
with chronic kidney disease is of particular interest. This article aims to
describe the association between ageing, frailty and chronic kidney disease in
light of the most recent and relevant scientific publications.

Copyright Â© 2016 Sociedad Española de Nefrología. Published by Elsevier España, 
S.L.U. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nefro.2016.03.020 
PMID: 27242263  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Geriatr Gerontol Int. 2017 Apr;17(4):529-544. doi: 10.1111/ggi.12758. Epub 2016
May 31.

Chronic kidney disease-related physical frailty and cognitive impairment: a
systemic review.

Shen Z(1), Ruan Q(2), Yu Z(2), Sun Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Huadong Hospital, Fudan University, 221 West Yan'an
Road, Shanghai, China.
(2)Shanghai Institute of Geriatrics and Gerontology, Shanghai Key Laboratory of
Clinical Geriatrics, Department of Geriatrics, Huadong Hospital, and Research
Center of Aging and Medicine, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University,
Shanghai, China.

AIM: The objective of this review was to assess chronic kidney disease-related
frailty and cognitive impairment, as well as their probable causes, mechanisms
and the interventions.
METHODS: Studies from 1990 to 2015 were reviewed to evaluate the relationship
between chronic kidney disease and physical frailty and cognitive impairment. Of 
the 1694 studies from the initial search, longitudinal studies (n = 22) with the 
keywords "Cognitive and CKD" and longitudinal or cross-sectional studies (n = 5) 
with the keywords "Frailty and CKD" were included in final analysis.
RESULTS: By pooling current research, we show clear evidence for a relationship
between chronic kidney disease and frailty and cognitive impairment in major
studies. Vascular disease is likely an important mediator, particularly for
cognitive impairment. However, non-vascular factors also play an important role. 
Many of the other mechanisms that contribute to impaired cognitive function and
increased frailty in CKD remain to be elucidated. In limited studies, medication 
therapy did not obtain the ideal effect. There are limited data on treatment
strategies, but addressing the vascular disease risk factors earlier in life
might decrease the subsequent burden of frailty and cognitive impairment in this 
population. Multidimensional interventions, which address both microvascular
health and other factors, may have substantial benefits for both the cognitive
impairments and physical frailty in this vulnerable population.
CONCLUSIONS: Chronic kidney disease is a potential cause of frailty and cognitive
impairment. Vascular and non-vascular factors are the possible causes. The
mechanism of chronic kidney disease-induced physical frailty and cognitive
impairment suggests that multidimensional interventions may be effective
therapeutic strategies in the early stage of chronic kidney disease. Geriatr
Gerontol Int 2017; 17: 529-544.

© 2016 Japan Geriatrics Society.

DOI: 10.1111/ggi.12758 
PMID: 27240548  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


215. BMJ Open. 2016 May 26;6(5):e010990. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010990.

Evaluating the effectiveness of exercise training on elderly patients who require
haemodialysis: study protocol for a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Matsuzawa R(1), Hoshi K(2), Yoneki K(3), Matsunaga A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rehabilitation, Kitasato University Hospital, Sagamihara, Japan.
(2)Department of Hygiene, Kitasato University School of Medicine, Sagamihara,
Japan.
(3)Department of Rehabilitation Sciences, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kitasato University, Sagamihara, Japan Sagami Circulatory Organ Clinic,
Sagamihara, Japan.
(4)Department of Rehabilitation Sciences, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kitasato University, Sagamihara, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: As the average age of haemodialysis patients rapidly increases
around the world, the number of frail, elderly patients has increased. Frailty is
well known to be an indicator of disability and a poor prognosis for
haemodialysis patients. Exercise interventions have been safely and successfully 
implemented for middle-aged or younger patients undergoing haemodialysis.
However, the benefits of exercise interventions on elderly patients undergoing
haemodialysis remain controversial. The main objective of this study is to
systematically review the effects of exercise training on the physical function, 
exercise capacity and quality of life of elderly patients undergoing
haemodialysis, and to provide an update on the relevant evidence.
METHODS AND ANALYSES: Published randomised controlled trials (RCTs) that assessed
the effectiveness of exercise training on haemodialysis patients with respect to 
physical function, exercise tolerance and quality of life will be included.
Bibliographic databases include MEDLINE, EMBASE, the Cochrane Central Register of
Controlled Trials, the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, CINAHL, Web of
Science, PsycINFO and PEDro. The risk of bias of the included RCTs will be
assessed using the Cochrane Collaboration's tool and TESTEX. The primary outcome 
will be physical function and exercise tolerance. This review protocol is
reported according to the PRISMA-P 2015 checklist. Statistical analysis will be
performed using review manager software (RevMan V.5.3, Cochrane Collaboration,
Oxford, England).
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: Ethical approval is not required because this study
does not include confidential personal data nor does it perform interventions on 
patients. This review is expected to inform readers on the effectiveness of
exercise training in elderly patients undergoing haemodialysis. Findings will be 
presented at conferences and submitted to a peer-reviewed journal for
publication.
PROSPERO REGISTRATION NUMBER: CRD42015020701.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010990 
PMCID: PMC4885427
PMID: 27231003  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


216. World J Urol. 2017 Jan;35(1):21-26. doi: 10.1007/s00345-016-1845-z. Epub 2016 May
12.

Preoperative frailty predicts postoperative complications and mortality in
urology patients.

Isharwal S(1), Johanning JM(2)(3), Dwyer JG(4), Schimid KK(5), LaGrange CA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Urology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, 984110 Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, NE, 68198-4110, USA. isharwal.sudhir@gmail.com.
(2)Division of Vascular Surgery, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha,
NE, USA.
(3)Department of Surgery, Veterans Administration Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.
(4)Division of Urology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, 984110 Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, NE, 68198-4110, USA.
(5)Department of Biostatistics, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE,
USA.

PURPOSE: Our objective was to determine the impact of preoperative frailty, as
measured by validated Risk Analysis Index (RAI), on the occurrence of
postoperative complications after urologic surgeries in a national database
comprised of diverse practice groups and cases.
STUDY DESIGN: The National Surgical Quality Improvement Program (NSQIP) database 
was queried from 2005 to 2011 for a list of abdominal, vaginal, transurethral and
scrotal urological surgeries using Current Procedural Terminology codes. The
study population was subdivided into two groups based on the nature of procedures
performed: complex procedures (inpatient) and simple procedures (outpatient).
Risk Analysis Index score was calculated using preoperative NSQIP variables to
determine preoperative frailty. Major postoperative morbidities (pulmonary,
cardiovascular, renal and infectious), mortality, return to operating room,
discharge destination and readmission to the hospital were examined.
RESULTS: The study identified 42,715 patients who underwent urological
procedures, 25,693 complex and 17,022 simple procedures. Mean RAI score (range)
was 7.75 (0-53). The majority of patients scored low on the RAI (90.57 % with
RAI < 10). As the RAI score increased, there was a significant increase in
postoperative complication and mortality rate (both p < 0.0001). Similarly, the
rate of return to operating room and hospital readmission rate increased as RAI
increased (both p < 0.0001). Additionally, rate of discharge to home decreased.
Interestingly, mortality rate in patients with high RAI did not differ comparing 
simple to complex procedures (p = 0.90), whereas complications were significantly
greater in the complex operation (p = 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Increase in frailty, as measured by RAI score, is associated with
increased postoperative complications and mortality. RAI may allow for rapid
identification and counseling of patients who are at high risk of adverse
perioperative outcomes.

DOI: 10.1007/s00345-016-1845-z 
PMID: 27172940  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Acta Clin Belg. 2016 Aug;71(4):206-13. doi: 10.1080/17843286.2016.1153816. Epub
2016 May 12.

Comprehensive geriatric assessment and comorbidities predict survival in
geriatric oncology.

Denewet N(1), De Breucker S(2), Luce S(3), Kennes B(4), Higuet S(1), Pepersack
T(5).

Author information: 
(1)a Geriatric Department, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Charleroi ,
Université Libre de Bruxelles , Charleroi , Belgium.
(2)b Geriatric Department, Hôpital Erasme , Université Libre de Bruxelles ,
Brussels , Belgium.
(3)c Medical Oncology Clinic, Hôpital Erasme , Université Libre de Bruxelles ,
Brussels , Belgium.
(4)d Geriatric Department, Hôpital André Vésale, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire
de Charleroi , Université Libre de Bruxelles , Montigny-le-Tilleul , Belgium.
(5)e Geriatric Department, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Saint-Pierre ,
Université Libre de Bruxelles , Brussels , Belgium.

OBJECTIVES: The comprehensive geriatric assessment (CGA) can detect geriatric
problems and potentially improve survival, physical, and cognitive state of
patients, as well as increase an older person's chances of staying at home
longer. In older people, the number and severity of comorbidity increase with age
and are an important determinant of survival. The aim of the study was to assess 
to which extent CGA and comorbidities could be seen as determinants of survival.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This study analyzed data from two hospitals that included 
geriatric assessments of patients aged 70 years and more with cancer linked to
mortality. Logistic regression was used to model survival predictors.
RESULTS: Two hundred and five various cancer patients (47% females) with a median
age of 79 were included. They presented with a lot of undiagnosed geriatric
problems. Screening scales (G8, SEGA), cognitive, and psychological disorders,
and low albumin levels appeared to be independent survival factors. A frailty
profile classification was associated with higher mortality. The average
comorbidity was graded 2 according to the Charlson scale. By the geriatric
cumulative illness rating scale (CIRS-G), the arithmetic average number of
affected organ systems was 5 (range 0-10) in all patients. Cardiovascular
disorders were the most common comorbidity. Renal insufficiency and anaemia were 
negatively associated with survival.
CONCLUSION: Old cancer patients present a lot of comorbidities and newly
diagnosed geriatric problems. Several tools provide determinants of survival in
old cancer patients. Prospective trials evaluating the utility of a CGA to guide 
interventions to improve quality of cancer care in older adults are justified.

DOI: 10.1080/17843286.2016.1153816 
PMID: 27169550  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Int Urol Nephrol. 2016 Aug;48(8):1357-1362. doi: 10.1007/s11255-016-1306-z. Epub 
2016 May 10.

High prevalence of frailty in end-stage renal disease.

Drost D(1), Kalf A(1), Vogtlander N(2), van Munster BC(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatrics, Gelre Hospitals, Apeldoorn, The Netherlands.
(2)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Gelre Hospitals, Apeldoorn,
The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Geriatrics, Gelre Hospitals, Apeldoorn, The Netherlands.
b.van.munster@gelre.nl.
(4)Department of Medicine, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The
Netherlands. b.van.munster@gelre.nl.

PURPOSE: Prognosis of the increasing number of elderly patients with end-stage
renal disease (ESRD) is poor with high risk of functional decline and mortality. 
Frailty seems to be a good predictor for those patients that will not benefit
from dialysis. Varying prevalences between populations are probably related to
the instrument used. The aim of this study was to measure the prevalence of
frailty among ESRD patients with two different validated instruments.
METHODS: This cross-sectional study was conducted among patients, aged ≥18 years,
receiving hemodialysis, peritoneal dialysis and pre-dialysis care between
September 2013 and December 2013 in a single dialysis center in Apeldoorn, the
Netherlands. Frailty was measured with the frailty index (FI) and frailty
phenotype (FP).
RESULTS: Prevalence of frailty by the FI was 36.8 % among 95 participants with
ESRD (age: 65.2 years, SD ± 12.0). Frailty prevalence among participants aged ≥65
and <65 years was 43.6 and 27.5 %, respectively. Female sex [odds ratio (OR) 3.3,
95 % confidence interval (CI) 1.3-8.0] and a Charlson comorbidity index score of 
≥5 (OR 2.6, 95 % CI 1.0-6.6) were associated with frailty. The FI identified
different but overlapping participants as frail compared with the FP; 62.5 % of
frail participants according to FI were also frail according to the FP.
CONCLUSIONS: Prevalence of frailty among young and elderly ESRD patients is high;
being female and having more comorbidity was associated with frailty. Use of a
broader definition of frailty, like the FI, gives a higher estimation of
prevalence among ESRD patients compared with a physical frailty assessment.

DOI: 10.1007/s11255-016-1306-z 
PMCID: PMC4949293
PMID: 27165401  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Physiol Rep. 2016 May;4(9). pii: e12780. doi: 10.14814/phy2.12780.

Mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress in patients with chronic kidney
disease.

Gamboa JL(1), Billings FT 4th(2), Bojanowski MT(3), Gilliam LA(4), Yu C(5),
Roshanravan B(6), Roberts LJ 2nd(3), Himmelfarb J(6), Ikizler TA(7), Brown NJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, Tennessee jorge.gamboa@vanderbilt.edu.
(2)Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, Tennessee Department of Anesthesiology, Vanderbilt University Medical 
Center, Nashville, Tennessee.
(3)Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, Tennessee.
(4)Department of Physiology, East Carolina University, Greenville, North
Carolina.
(5)Department of Biostatistics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, 
Tennessee.
(6)Kidney Research Institute, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington.
(7)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical 
Center, Nashville, Tennessee.

Mitochondria abnormalities in skeletal muscle may contribute to frailty and
sarcopenia, commonly present in patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD).
Dysfunctional mitochondria are also a major source of oxidative stress and may
contribute to cardiovascular disease in CKD We tested the hypothesis that
mitochondrial structure and function worsens with the severity of CKD
Mitochondrial volume density, mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy number, BNIP3, and
PGC1α protein expression were evaluated in skeletal muscle biopsies obtained from
27 subjects (17 controls and 10 with CKD stage 5 on hemodialysis). We also
measured mtDNA copy number in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs), plasma 
isofurans, and plasma F2-isoprostanes in 208 subjects divided into three groups: 
non-CKD (eGFR>60 mL/min), CKD stage 3-4 (eGFR 60-15 mL/min), and CKD stage 5 (on 
hemodialysis). Muscle biopsies from patients with CKD stage 5 revealed lower
mitochondrial volume density, lower mtDNA copy number, and higher BNIP3 content
than controls. mtDNA copy number in PBMCs was decreased with increasing severity 
of CKD: non-CKD (6.48, 95% CI 4.49-8.46), CKD stage 3-4 (3.30, 95% CI 0.85-5.75, 
P = 0.048 vs. non-CKD), and CKD stage 5 (1.93, 95% CI 0.27-3.59, P = 0.001 vs.
non-CKD). Isofurans were higher in patients with CKD stage 5 (median 59.21 pg/mL,
IQR 41.76-95.36) compared to patients with non-CKD (median 49.95 pg/mL, IQR
27.88-83.46, P = 0.001), whereas F2-isoprostanes did not differ among groups.
Severity of CKD is associated with mitochondrial dysfunction and markers of
oxidative stress. Mitochondrial abnormalities, which are common in skeletal
muscle from patients with CKD stage 5, may explain the muscle dysfunction
associated with frailty and sarcopenia in CKD Further studies are required to
evaluate mitochondrial function in vivo in patients with different CKD stages.

© 2016 The Authors. Physiological Reports published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on
behalf of the American Physiological Society and The Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.14814/phy2.12780 
PMCID: PMC4873632
PMID: 27162261  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Rev Esp Geriatr Gerontol. 2017 May - Jun;52(3):152-158. doi:
10.1016/j.regg.2016.03.006. Epub 2016 May 6.

[Chronic kidney disease in the elderly patient].

[Article in Spanish]

Mora-Gutiérrez JM(1), Slon Roblero MF(2), Castaño Bilbao I(2), Izquierdo Bautista
D(2), Arteaga Coloma J(2), Martínez Velilla N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Nefrología, Clínica Universidad de Navarra, Pamplona, España;
Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria de Navarra (IdiSNa), Pamplona, España.
Electronic address: jmora@unav.es.
(2)Servicio de Nefrología, Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra, Pamplona, España.
(3)Servicio de Geriatría, Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra, Pamplona, España; Red
de Investigación en Servicios Sanitarios en Enfermedades Crónicas (REDISSEC),
España; Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria de Navarra (IdiSNa), Pamplona,
España.

Comment in
    Rev Esp Geriatr Gerontol. 2017 May - Jun;52(3):173.

Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is widely prevalent worldwide, with a special impact
on elderly population. Around half of people aged over 75 meet diagnostic
criteria for CKD according to the recent 'Kidney disease improving global
outcomes' (KDIGO) 2012 clinical practice guideline on the evaluation and
management of CKD. However, geriatric patients have characteristics that may not 
be addressed by general guidelines. Therefore, it is important to know the
natural history of the disease, symptoms, and 'red-flags' that could help in the 
management of these patients. In this review, a complete approach is presented on
the pathophysiology, diagnosis, and treatment of CKD in the geriatric population.

Copyright © 2016 SEGG. Publicado por Elsevier España, S.L.U. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.regg.2016.03.006 
PMID: 27161192  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Kidney Int. 2016 Jul;90(1):53-66. doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2016.02.025. Epub 2016 May 
6.

Screening for muscle wasting and dysfunction in patients with chronic kidney
disease.

Carrero JJ(1), Johansen KL(2), Lindholm B(3), Stenvinkel P(3), Cuppari L(4),
Avesani CM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Renal Medicine and Baxter Novum, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden; Center for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden. Electronic address: juan.jesus.carrero@ki.se.
(2)Division of Nephrology, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, California, USA.
(3)Divisions of Renal Medicine and Baxter Novum, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Division of Nephrology, Federal University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(5)Department of Applied Nutrition, Nutrition Institute, Rio de Janeiro State
University, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

Skeletal muscle mass and muscle function are negatively affected by a variety of 
conditions inherent to chronic kidney disease (CKD) and to dialysis treatment.
Skeletal muscle mass and function serve as indicators of the nutritional and
clinical state of CKD patients, and low values or derangements over time are
strong predictors of poor patient outcomes. However, muscle size and function can
be affected by different factors, may decline at different rates, and may have
different patient implications. Therefore, operational definitions of frailty and
sarcopenia have emerged to encompass these 2 dimensions of muscle health, i.e.,
size and functionality. The aim of this review is to appraise available methods
for assessment of muscle mass and functionality, with an emphasis on their
accuracy in the setting of CKD patients. We then discuss the selection of
reference cutoffs for defining conditions of muscle wasting and dysfunction.
Finally, we review definitions applied in studies addressing sarcopenia and
frailty in CKD patients and discuss their applicability for diagnosis and
monitoring.

Copyright © 2016 International Society of Nephrology. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.kint.2016.02.025 
PMID: 27157695  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


222. PLoS One. 2016 May 4;11(5):e0153961. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0153961.
eCollection 2016.

Slow Gait Speed and Rapid Renal Function Decline Are Risk Factors for
Postoperative Delirium after Urological Surgery.

Sato T(1), Hatakeyama S(1), Okamoto T(1), Yamamoto H(1), Hosogoe S(1), Tobisawa
Y(1), Yoneyama T(2), Hashiba E(3), Yoneyama T(1), Hashimoto Y(2), Koie T(1),
Hirota K(3), Ohyama C(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Hirosaki University Graduate School of Medicine,
Hirosaki, Japan.
(2)Department of Advanced Transplant and Regenerative Medicine, Hirosaki
University Graduate School of Medicine, Hirosaki, Japan.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology, Hirosaki University Graduate School of Medicine,
Hirosaki, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to identify risk factors associated with
postoperative delirium in patients undergoing urological surgery.
METHODS: We prospectively evaluated pre- and postoperative risk factors for
postoperative delirium in consecutive 215 patients who received urological
surgery between August 2013 and November 2014. Preoperative factors included
patient demographics, comorbidities, and frailty assessment. Frailty was measured
by handgrip strength, fatigue scale of depression, fall risk assessment, and gait
speed (the timed Get-up and Go test). Postoperative factors included types of
anesthesia, surgical procedure, renal function and serum albumin decline, blood
loss, surgery time, highest body temperature, and complications. Uni- and
multivariate logistic regression analyses were performed to assess pre- and
postoperative predictors for the development of postoperative delirium.
RESULTS: Median age of this cohort was 67 years. Ten patients (4.7%) experienced 
postoperative delirium. These patients were significantly older, had weak
handgrip strength, a higher fall risk assessment score, slow gait speed, and
greater renal function decline compared with patients without delirium.
Multivariate analysis revealed slow gait speed (>13.0 s) and rapid renal function
decline (>30%) were independent risk factors for postoperative delirium.
CONCLUSIONS: Slow gait speed and rapid renal function decline after urological
surgery are significant factors for postoperative delirium. These data will be
helpful for perioperative patient management. This study was registered as a
clinical trial: UMIN: R000018809.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0153961 
PMCID: PMC4856409
PMID: 27145178  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Stat Methods Med Res. 2018 Mar;27(3):832-845. doi: 10.1177/0962280216643563. Epub
2016 May 2.

Dynamic prediction of recurrent events data by landmarking with application to a 
follow-up study of patients after kidney transplant.

Musoro JZ(1), Struijk GH(2), Geskus RB(1), Ten Berge I(2), Zwinderman AH(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Bioinformatic
Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(2)2 Renal Transplant Unit, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

This paper extends dynamic prediction by landmarking to recurrent event data. The
motivating data comprised post-kidney transplantation records of repeated
infections and repeated measurements of multiple markers. At each landmark time
point ts, a Cox proportional hazards model with a frailty term was fitted using
data of individuals who were at risk at landmark s. This model included the
time-updated marker values at ts as time-fixed covariates. Based on a stacked
data set that merged all landmark data sets, we considered supermodels that allow
parameters to depend on the landmarks in a smooth fashion. We described and
evaluated four ways to parameterize the supermodels for recurrent event data.
With both the study data and simulated data sets, we compared supermodels that
were fitted on stacked data sets that consisted of either overlapping or
non-overlapping landmark periods. We observed that for recurrent event data, the 
supermodels may yield biased estimates when overlapping landmark periods are used
for stacking. Using the best supermodel amongst the ones considered, we
dynamically estimated the probability to remain infection free between ts and a
prediction horizon thor, conditional on the information available at ts.

DOI: 10.1177/0962280216643563 
PMID: 27142981 


224. J Am Coll Surg. 2016 Aug;223(2):286-90. doi: 10.1016/j.jamcollsurg.2016.03.029.
Epub 2016 Mar 31.

Prolonged Length of Stay after Esophageal Resection: Identifying Drivers of
Increased Length of Stay Using the NSQIP Database.

Park KU(1), Rubinfeld I(1), Hodari A(1), Hammoud Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, MI.
(2)Department of Cardiac and Thoracic Surgery, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit,
MI. Electronic address: Zhammou1@hfhs.org.

BACKGROUND: Although influence of technical complications in association to
hospital length of stay has been studied extensively in esophageal resection,
nontechnical factors responsible for prolonged length of stay have not been
reported. Using the NSQIP dataset, we hypothesized that we would be able to
identify factors associated with prolonged length of stay after esophagectomy.
STUDY DESIGN: National Surgical Quality Improvement Program data from 2005 to
2012 were reviewed for CPT codes for esophagectomy. Outlier status for length of 
stay was defined as >75th percentile. Logistic regression was used to predict
outlier status and linear regression to discern factors contributing to longer
lengths of stay.
RESULTS: A total of 3,538 cases were reviewed. The 75th percentile for length of 
stay was 17 days. Preoperative predictors of hospital stay outliers include
emergency surgery and frailty index (odds ratios = 3.7 and 3.6; p < 0.001). Deep 
organ space infection and progressive renal insufficiency had the highest
likelihood of prolonged length of stay (odds ratios = 5.2 and 5.1; p < 0.001).
Failure to wean off of ventilator in 48 hours, urinary tract infection, and
pneumonia were associated with length of stay outlier (odds ratios = 3.7, 2.7,
and 2.7; all p < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Urinary tract infection and pneumonia after esophagectomy are
associated with longer hospital stays. Although meticulous surgical technique
remains paramount, our study demonstrates that postoperative nontechnical
complications factor into prolonged hospital stays. Focus on such factors can
lead to reductions in hospital stays.

Copyright © 2016 American College of Surgeons. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jamcollsurg.2016.03.029 
PMID: 27118713  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2016 Jul 7;11(7):1245-59. doi: 10.2215/CJN.06660615. Epub 
2016 Apr 26.

The Relevance of Geriatric Impairments in Patients Starting Dialysis: A
Systematic Review.

van Loon IN(1), Wouters TR(2), Boereboom FT(3), Bots ML(4), Verhaar MC(5),
Hamaker ME(6).

Author information: 
(1)Dianet Dialysis Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands; Departments of Internal
Medicine and Department of Nephrology and Hypertension and i.vanloon@dianet.nl.
(2)Departments of Internal Medicine and.
(3)Dianet Dialysis Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands; Departments of Internal
Medicine and.
(4)Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care, University Medical Center 
Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Nephrology and Hypertension and.
(6)Geriatrics, Diakonessenhuis Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands; and.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: With aging of the general population, patients who
enter dialysis therapy will more frequently have geriatric impairments and a
considerable comorbidity burden. The most vulnerable among these patients might
benefit from conservative therapy. Whether assessment of geriatric impairments
would contribute to the decision-making process of dialysis initiation is
unknown.
DESIGN, SETTING, PARTICIPANTS, & MEASUREMENTS: A systematic Medline and Embase
search was performed on December 1, 2015 to identify studies assessing the
association between risk of mortality or hospitalization and one or more
geriatric impairments at the start of dialysis therapy, including impairment of
cognitive function, mood, performance status or (instrumental) activities of
daily living, mobility (including falls), social environment, or nutritional
status.
RESULTS: Twenty-seven studies were identified that assessed one or more geriatric
impairments with respect to prognosis. The quality of most studies was moderate. 
Only seven studies carried out an analysis of elderly patients (≥70 years old).
Malnutrition and frailty were systematically assessed, and their relation with
mortality was clear. In addition, cognitive impairment and functional outcomes at
the initiation of dialysis were related to an increased mortality in most
studies. However, not all studies applied systematic assessment tools, thereby
potentially missing relevant impairment. None of the studies applied a geriatric 
assessment across multiple domains.
CONCLUSIONS: Geriatric impairment across multiple domains at dialysis initiation 
is related to poor outcome. However, information in the elderly is sparse, and a 
systematic approach of multiple domains with respect to poor outcome has not been
performed. Because a geriatric assessment has proved useful in predicting outcome
in other medical fields, its potential role in the ESRD population should be the 
subject of future research.

Copyright © 2016 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.2215/CJN.06660615 
PMCID: PMC4934838
PMID: 27117581  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Rev Invest Clin. 2016 Mar-Apr;68(2):68-74.

Aging Kidney Transplantation.

Musso CG(1)(2), Giordani MC(1), Imperiali N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Nephrology Division, Hospital Italiano de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires,
Argentina.
(2)Ageing Biology Unit, Hospital Italiano de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

There are several immunological and non-immunological factors related to renal
graft deterioration, and histological lesions such as interstitial fibrosis and
tubular atrophy overlap with those observed in aging kidneys. Consequently, it
has been proposed that kidney transplant senescence could contribute to graft
loss. The process of cell senescence displays characteristics such as an
increased expression of specific aging suppressor genes, shortened telomeres,
mitochondrial changes, increased expression of negative regulators of the cell
cycle, and immunological senescence. Additionally, tubular frailty characterizes 
the aged kidney, making it more susceptible to ischemia, reperfusion, toxic
injury, and consequently, to inflammation. Moreover, renal tissue injury
predisposes the older graft not only to progressive deterioration due to
glomerular hyperfiltration, but also triggers acute rejection due to increased
immunogenicity. In conclusion, renal graft senescence is a complex process, and
its better understanding will help the nephrologist in its management in order to
achieve a longer graft survival.


PMID: 27103042  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


227. J Clin Neurosci. 2016 Aug;30:155-157. doi: 10.1016/j.jocn.2016.02.005. Epub 2016 
Apr 1.

Challenges of cervical reconstruction for destructive spondyloarthropathy in
renal osteodystrophy.

Elder BD(1), Petteys RJ(2), Sciubba DM(2), Wolinsky JP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
1800 Orleans Street, Room 6007, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA. Electronic address:
belder4@jhmi.edu.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
1800 Orleans Street, Room 6007, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA.

Patients with end stage renal disease on hemodialysis may present with
destructive spondyloarthropathy of the spine, most commonly in the subaxial
cervical and lumbar spine, often with severe stenosis and instability. However,
surgical management of these patients is challenging due to a high pseudarthrosis
rate, poor bone quality, and medical frailty. We present a 49-year-old man on
hemodialysis who presented with C4-C5 vertebral body destruction and a focal
kyphotic deformity with myelopathy. The patient underwent a 360 degree
decompression and reconstructive procedure that resulted in posterior
instrumentation failure. Several salvage techniques were used in order to
adequately stabilize the spine while preserving the patient's remaining cervical 
motion.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jocn.2016.02.005 
PMID: 27052255  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Nephrology (Carlton). 2016 Apr;21(4):344-5. doi: 10.1111/nep.12612.

Scenario of assessment might influence results using self-report frailty
instrument in chronic dialysis patients.

Chao CT(1)(2)(3), Huang JW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital Jinshan branch,
New Taipei City, Taiwan.
(2)Graduate Institute of Toxicology, National Taiwan University College of
Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan.

Comment on
    Nephrology (Carlton). 2015 May;20(5):321-8.

DOI: 10.1111/nep.12612 
PMID: 27028418  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Exp Gerontol. 2016 Jun 15;79:31-6. doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2016.03.012. Epub 2016
Mar 23.

Serum levels of C-terminal agrin fragment (CAF) are associated with sarcopenia in
older multimorbid community-dwellers: Results from the ilSIRENTE study.

Landi F(1), Calvani R(2), Lorenzi M(2), Martone AM(2), Tosato M(2), Drey M(3),
D'Angelo E(2), Capoluongo E(4), Russo A(5), Bernabei R(2), Onder G(2), Marzetti
E(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatrics, Neurosciences and Orthopedics, Catholic University
of the Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy. Electronic address:
francesco.landi@rm.unicatt.it.
(2)Department of Geriatrics, Neurosciences and Orthopedics, Catholic University
of the Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy.
(3)Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik IV, Schwerpunkt Akutgeriatrie, Klinikum der
Universitat Munchen, Munich, Germany.
(4)Institute of Biochemistry and Clinical Biochemistry, Catholic University of
the Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy.
(5)Teaching Nursing Home "Opera Santa Maria della Pace", Fontecchio-Celano,
L'Aquila, Italy.
(6)Department of Geriatrics, Neurosciences and Orthopedics, Catholic University
of the Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy. Electronic address: emarzetti@live.com.

BACKGROUND: The C-terminal agrin fragment (CAF), a circulating byproduct of
neuromuscular junction disassembly, has been proposed as a possible biomarker for
sarcopenia. However, its validity in "real-world", multimorbid older persons is
currently unknown. The present study was undertaken to verify if serum CAF levels
were associated with sarcopenia in a population of old and very old persons
living in the community.
METHODS: Data were from the ilSIRENTE Aging and Longevity Study, a prospective
cohort study conducted in all persons aged 80years and older residing in the
Sirente geographic area (Italy; n=332). The identification of sarcopenia was
based on the criteria elaborated by the European Working Group on Sarcopenia in
Older People (EWGSOP). Serum levels of CAF were determined using a commercial
ELISA kit.
RESULTS: Sarcopenia was identified in 101 participants (30.8%). Serum levels of
CAF were significantly higher in older adults with sarcopenia compared with
non-sarcopenic participants (96.99±5.40pmol/L vs. 76.54±2.15pmol/L; p<0.001). The
association remained significant in both genders after adjustment for several
possible confounding factors, including age, cognition, disability status, body
mass index, congestive heart failure, lung diseases, diabetes, renal failure, and
plasma levels of C-reactive protein and interleukin 6.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results obtained from a fairly large sample of old and very old,
multimorbid community-dwellers show that elevated serum CAF levels are associated
with sarcopenia, independent of age, gender and several clinical, functional,
anthropometric, and biochemical variables. The determination of serum CAF
concentration may therefore be proposed as a simple screening test for sarcopenia
in the community.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exger.2016.03.012 
PMID: 27015736  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


230. PeerJ. 2016 Mar 15;4:e1818. doi: 10.7717/peerj.1818. eCollection 2016.

Functional assessment of chronic illness therapy-the fatigue scale exhibits
stronger associations with clinical parameters in chronic dialysis patients
compared to other fatigue-assessing instruments.

Chao CT(1), Huang JW(2), Chiang CK(3); COGENT (COhort of GEriatric Nephrology in 
NTUH) study group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital Jinshan branch,
New Taipei City, Taiwan; Graduate Institute of Toxicology, National Taiwan
University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Internal Medicine, 
National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital , Taipei 
, Taiwan.
(3)Graduate Institute of Toxicology, National Taiwan University College of
Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Integrative Diagnostics and Therapeutics,
National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.

Background. Patients with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) have a high symptom
burden, among which fatigue is highly prevalent. Many fatigue-assessing
instruments exist, but comparisons among instruments in this patient population
have yet to be investigated. Methods. ESRD patients under chronic hemodialysis
were prospectively enrolled and seven types of fatigue instruments were
administered: Brief Fatigue Inventory (BFI), Functional Assessment of Chronic
Illness Therapy-Fatigue (FACIT-F), Fatigue Severity Scale (FSS), Lee Fatigue
Scale (LFS), Fatigue Questionnaire (FQ), Fatigue Symptom Inventory (FSI), and
Short-Form 36-Vitality (SF36-V). Using these instruments, we investigated the
correlation between fatigue severity and clinical/biochemical parameters,
including demographic/comorbidity profile, dialysis-related complications, and
frailty severity. We used regression analysis with serum albumin and frailty
severity as the dependent variables to investigate the independent correlations. 
Results. A total of 46 ESRD patients were enrolled (average age of 67 ± 11.6
years), and 50% of them had type 2 diabetes mellitus. Results from the seven
tested instruments showed high correlation with each other. We found that the
fatigue severity by FACIT-F was significantly associated with age (p = 0.03),
serum albumin (p = 0.003) and creatinine (p = 0.02) levels, while SF36-V scores
were also significantly associated with age (p = 0.02) and serum creatinine
levels (p = 0.04). However, the fatigue severity measured by the FSS, FSI, FQ,
BFI, and LFS did not exhibit these associations. Moreover, regression analysis
showed that only FACIT-F scores were independently associated with serum albumin 
levels and frailty severity in ESRD patients. Conclusion. Among the seven
fatigue-assessing instruments, only the FACIT-F yielded results that demonstrated
significant and independent associations with important outcome-related features 
in ESRD patients.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.1818 
PMCID: PMC4797762
PMID: 26998414 


231. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab. 2016 May;41(5):565-72. doi: 10.1139/apnm-2015-0550. Epub
2016 Feb 9.

Protein "requirements" beyond the RDA: implications for optimizing health.

Phillips SM(1), Chevalier S(2)(3), Leidy HJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Kinesiology, Exercise Metabolism Research Group - Protein
Metabolism Research Lab, McMaster University, 1280 Main Street W., Hamilton, ON
L8S 4K1, Canada.
(2)b Department of Medicine, McGill University, Hamilton, ON L8S 4K1, Canada.
(3)c School of Dietetics and Human Nutrition, McGill University, McGill
University Health Centre-Research Institute, Crabtree Nutrition Laboratories,
1001, boul. Décarie, E02.7226 Montréal, QC H4A 3J1, Canada.
(4)d Department of Nutrition and Exercise Physiology, School of Medicine,
University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65203, USA.

Substantial evidence supports the increased consumption of high-quality protein
to achieve optimal health outcomes. A growing body of research indicates that
protein intakes well above the current Recommended Dietary Allowance help to
promote healthy aging, appetite regulation, weight management, and goals aligned 
with athletic performance. Higher protein intakes may help prevent age-related
sarcopenia, the loss of muscle mass, and strength that predisposes older adults
to frailty, disability, and loss of autonomy. Higher protein diets also improve
satiety and lead to greater reductions in body weight and fat mass compared with 
standard protein diets, and may therefore serve as a successful strategy to help 
prevent and/or treat obesity. Athletes can also benefit from higher protein
intakes to maximize athletic performance given the critical role protein plays in
stimulating muscle protein remodelling after exercise. Protein quality, per meal 
dose, and timing of ingestion are also important considerations. Despite
persistent beliefs to the contrary, we can find no evidence-based link between
higher protein diets and renal disease or adverse bone health. This brief
synopsis highlights recent learnings based on presentations at the 2015 Canadian 
Nutrition Society conference, Advances in Protein Nutrition across the Lifespan. 
Current evidence indicates intakes in the range of at least 1.2 to 1.6 g/(kg·day)
of high-quality protein is a more ideal target for achieving optimal health
outcomes in adults.

DOI: 10.1139/apnm-2015-0550 
PMID: 26960445  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


232. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2016 Mar;151(3):745-751. doi:
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2015.11.022. Epub 2015 Nov 21.

Psoas muscle size as a frailty measure for open and transcatheter aortic valve
replacement.

Paknikar R(1), Friedman J(2), Cron D(2), Deeb GM(3), Chetcuti S(4), Grossman
PM(4), Wang S(5), Englesbe M(5), Patel HJ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiac Surgery, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann
Arbor, Mich; Morphomic Analysis Group, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann
Arbor, Mich.
(2)Morphomic Analysis Group, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor,
Mich.
(3)Department of Cardiac Surgery, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann
Arbor, Mich.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor,
Mich.
(5)Department of Surgery, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor, Mich;
Morphomic Analysis Group, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor, Mich.
(6)Department of Cardiac Surgery, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann
Arbor, Mich; Morphomic Analysis Group, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann
Arbor, Mich. Electronic address: hjpatel@med.umich.edu.

Comment in
    J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2016 Mar;151(3):752-3.
    J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2016 Mar;151(3):750-1.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the use of sarcopenia as a frailty assessment tool for
patients with aortic stenosis undergoing surgical aortic valve replacement (SAVR)
or transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR).
METHODS: The study cohort comprised 295 patients who underwent either SAVR (n =
156) or TAVR (n = 139). The mean preoperative Society of Thoracic Surgeons
mortality risk score was 4.7%. Preoperative computed tomography (CT) scans were
used to calculate gender-standardized total psoas area (TPA), as a validated
measure of sarcopenia.
RESULTS: For the entire cohort, independent predictors of a composite measure of 
30-day death, stroke, renal failure, prolonged ventilation, and deep wound
infection included preoperative STS major morbidity and mortality risk score
(odds ratio [OR], 91.1; P = .02) and TPA (OR, 0.5; P = .024). Two-year survival
was 85.7% in patients with sarcopenia, compared with 93.8% in patients without
sarcopenia (P = .02). Independent predictors of late survival included TPA
(hazard ratio, 0.47; P = .02). Male sex (OR, 0.52; P = .04) and TPA (OR, 0.6; P =
.001) were predictive of high resource utilization. A separate analysis by
treatment group found that TPA predicted high resource utilization after SAVR
(OR, 0.4; P < .001), but not after TAVR (P = .66).
CONCLUSIONS: CT scan-derived measurement of TPA as an objective frailty
assessment tool predicts early morbidity and mortality, high resource
utilization, and late survival after treatment for aortic stenosis. The
correlation observed between sarcopenia and resource utilization after SAVR
versus TAVR suggests that this simple and reproducible risk assessment tool also 
may help identify those patients who will derive optimal benefit from
catheter-based therapy.

Copyright © 2016 The American Association for Thoracic Surgery. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2015.11.022 
PMID: 26896357  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


233. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2016 Feb;64(2):270-6. doi: 10.1111/jgs.13951.

Fibroblast Growth Factor-23 and Frailty in Elderly Community-Dwelling
Individuals: The Cardiovascular Health Study.

Beben T(1)(2), Ix JH(1)(2), Shlipak MG(3)(4), Sarnak MJ(5), Fried LF(6)(7),
Hoofnagle AN(8), Chonchol M(9), Kestenbaum BR(10), de Boer IH(10), Rifkin
DE(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, University of California at San Diego, San Diego,
California.
(2)Nephrology Section, Veterans Affairs San Diego Healthcare System, San Diego,
California.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of California at San Francisco, San
Francisco, California.
(4)General Internal Medicine Section, San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, San Francisco, California.
(5)Division of Nephrology, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts.
(6)Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh and Veteran Affairs
Pittsburgh Healthcare System, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(7)Nephrology Section, Veterans Affairs Pittsburgh Healthcare System, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania.
(8)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington.
(9)Division of Renal Disease and Hypertension, University of Colorado at Denver, 
Denver, Colorado.
(10)Division of Nephrology and Kidney Research Institute, Department of Medicine,
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington.

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate whether fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF-23) is related
to frailty and to characterize the nature of their joint association with
mortality.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional analysis for frailty and longitudinal cohort analysis for
mortality.
SETTING: Cardiovascular Health Study.
PARTICIPANTS: Community-dwelling individuals (N = 2,977; mean age 77.9 ± 4.7, 40%
male, 83% white).
MEASUREMENTS: The predictor was serum FGF-23 concentration (C-terminal
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay), and the outcomes were frailty status
(determined according to frailty phenotype criteria of weight loss, weakness,
exhaustion, slowness, and low physical activity) and mortality. Multinomial
logistic regression was used to assess the cross-sectional association between
FGF-23 and frailty and prefrailty, adjusting for demographic characteristics,
cardiovascular disease and risk factors, and kidney markers. Proportional hazards
Cox proportional hazards regression was used to assess the association between
FGF-23, frailty, and all-cause mortality.
RESULTS: Mean estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) was 64 ± 17 mL/min per 
1.73 m(2) . Median FGF-23 was 70.3 RU/mL (interquartile range 53.4-99.2); 52%
were prefrail, and 13% were frail. After multivariate adjustment, each doubling
in FGF-23 concentration was associated with 38% (95% confidence interval (CI) =
17-62%) higher odds of frailty than of nonfrailty and 16% (95% CI = 3-30%) higher
odds of prefrailty. FGF-23 (hazard ratio (HR) = 1.16, 95% CI = 1.10-1.23) and
frailty (HR = 1.82, 95% CI = 1.57-2.12) were independently associated with
mortality, but neither association was meaningfully attenuated when adjusted for 
the other.
CONCLUSION: In a large cohort of older adults, higher FGF-23 was independently
associated with prevalent frailty and prefrailty. FGF-23 and frailty were
independent and additive risk factors for mortality. FGF-23 may be a marker for
functional outcomes.

© 2016, Copyright the Authors Journal compilation © 2016, The American Geriatrics
Society.

DOI: 10.1111/jgs.13951 
PMCID: PMC5510331
PMID: 26889836  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Exp Gerontol. 2017 Jan;87(Pt B):156-159. doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2016.02.003. Epub
2016 Feb 12.

Kidney disease and aging: A reciprocal relation.

Kooman JP(1), van der Sande FM(2), Leunissen KM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Nephrology, University Hospital
Maastricht, The Netherlands. Electronic address: jeroen.kooman@mumc.nl.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Nephrology, University Hospital
Maastricht, The Netherlands.

Chronic kidney disease (CKD) and end-stage renal disease (ESRD) are
overrepresented in elderly patients. This provides specific challenges for the
treatment, as the start of dialysis in vulnerable elderly patients may be
associated with a rapid decline in functional performance. However, prognosis in 
elderly patients with ESRD is quite variable and related to the presence of
comorbidity and geriatric impairments. The decision to start dialysis in elderly 
patients should always be based on shared decision making, which may be aided by 
the use of prediction models which should however not be used to withhold
dialysis treatment. The treatment of ESRD in elderly patients should be based on 
a multidimensional treatment plan with a role for active rehabilitation.
Moreover, there also appears to be a reciprocal relationship between aging and
CKD, as the presence of geriatric complications is also high in younger patients 
with ESRD. This has led to the hypothesis of a premature aging process associated
with CKD, resulting in different phenotypes such as premature vascular aging,
muscle wasting, bone disease, cognitive dysfunction and frailty. Prevention and
treatment of this phenotype is based on optimal treatment of CKD, associated
comorbidities, and lifestyle factors by established treatments. For the future,
interventions, which are developed to combat the aging process in general, might 
also have relevance for the treatment of patients with CKD, but their role should
always be investigated in adequately powered clinical trials, as results obtained
in experimental trials may not be directly translatable to the clinical situation
of elderly patients. In the meantime, physical exercise is a very important
intervention, by improving both physical capacity and functional performance, as 
well as by a direct effect on the aging process.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exger.2016.02.003 
PMID: 26880178  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Rev Med Brux. 2015 Nov-Dec;36(6):475-84.

[Hyponatremia in the elderly: its role in frailty].

[Article in French]

Hanotier P.

Hyponatremia is the most common electrolyte disorder in elderly patients. The
incidence is about 7% in elderly healthy people but can exceed 40% in
hospitalized patients. Considering all its aetiologies hyponatremia is associated
with increased mortality and appears as a factor of poor prognosis. Alteration in
the regulation of water homeostasis in the elderly result from multiple
consequence of aging: change in body composition, alteration in renal function
and hormonal changes. The high frequency of nutritional problems, particularly
protein malnutrition predisposes the elderly to the development of hyponatremia. 
Although diuretics especially thiazides are implicated as a frequent cause of
hyponatremia on geriatric medicine, normovolemic hyponatremia and more
particularly the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis is the most common cause.
The aetiology of this syndrome can be determined in only approximately half of
the cases. Cancers and medications, principally psychotropic agents commonly
prescribed in geriatrics are the most frequent aetiologies. Hyponatremia could be
a factor of frailty in geriatrics. Mild to moderate hyponatremia is generally
considered asymptomatic but recent studies reported that asymptomatic
hyponatremia contributes to neurological troubles like cognitive disorders,
posture and gait impairments. Hyponatremia could be an independent risk factor of
falls and could be associated with the development of osteoporosis. This review
of the literature emphasizes the importance of screening and a systematic
management of hyponatremia in the elderly people, even in the minor forms and
those considered as asymptomatic.


PMID: 26837111  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Eur J Intern Med. 2016 May;30:88-93. doi: 10.1016/j.ejim.2016.01.011. Epub 2016
Jan 22.

Acute pancreatitis in elderly patients: A retrospective evaluation at hospital
admission.

Losurdo G(1), Iannone A(1), Principi M(1), Barone M(1), Ranaldo N(1), Ierardi
E(2), Di Leo A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Gastroenterology, Department of Emergency and Organ
Transplantation, AOU Policlinico, University of Bari, Bari, Italy.
(2)Section of Gastroenterology, Department of Emergency and Organ
Transplantation, AOU Policlinico, University of Bari, Bari, Italy. Electronic
address: ierardi.enzo@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Acute pancreatitis (AP) in elderly may have an aggressive
course due to co-morbidity high rate and severe presentation. We retrospectively 
evaluated AP severity and its underlying factors in a group of elderly patients
compared with an adult population sample.
METHODS: Forty-two elderly patients (65-102years) and 48 controls (19-64years)
admitted at our Unit for biliary or alcoholic AP were retrospectively enrolled.
AP severity was evaluated by the Atlanta classification and Ransom score.
Laboratory investigations and demographic data were collected. Comparison between
the two groups was performed by t-test, ANOVA or Fisher's exact test. A
multinomial logistic regression was used to determine factors affecting AP
severity.
RESULTS: Elderly patients showed more severe Atlanta (1.81±0.75 vs 1.29±0.46;
p=0.007) and higher Ransom (2.52±1.57 vs 0.75±0.73; p<0.0001) scores. No death
was observed. Elderly patients consumed more drugs than controls, had higher
rates of cardiovascular, pulmonary and renal co-morbidity, showed higher
creatinine (1.09±0.41 vs 0.81±0.18; p=0.004) and lower calcium levels (8.43±0.48 
vs 8.88±0.44; p=0.002). We observed only one case of fluid necrosis in an old
patient. Non-necrotic fluid collections were more common in the elderly (40.5% vs
12.5%; p=0.003). At multivariate analysis, AP severity was influenced by white
blood cell-count (WBC: OR=1.94; p=0.048), aspartate-transaminase-levels (AST:
OR=1.97; p=0.02), serum lactate-dehydrogenase (LDH: OR=1.07; p=0.047) and Ransom 
score (OR=70.4; p=0.036) in elderly, while only Ransom score correlated in
controls (OR=66.04; p<0.001). The etiology (biliary/alcoholic) did not influence 
the severity.
CONCLUSIONS: Elderly patients usually undergo a severe AP course, but without
increase of mortality. High WBC, LDH, AST and Ransom score at the onset may
predict AP severity.

Copyright © 2016 European Federation of Internal Medicine. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejim.2016.01.011 
PMID: 26806437  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2016 Apr 7;11(4):626-32. doi: 10.2215/CJN.03710415. Epub
2016 Jan 20.

Association of Performance-Based and Self-Reported Function-Based Definitions of 
Frailty with Mortality among Patients Receiving Hemodialysis.

Johansen KL(1), Dalrymple LS(2), Glidden D(3), Delgado C(4), Kaysen GA(2), Grimes
B(3), Chertow GM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology and Nephrology Section, San Francisco Veterans Affairs 
Medical Center, San Francisco, California; Department of Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, University of California, San Francisco, California;
Kirsten.johansen@ucsf.edu.
(2)Division of Nephrology, University of California, Davis, California; and.
(3)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California, San
Francisco, California;
(4)Division of Nephrology and Nephrology Section, San Francisco Veterans Affairs 
Medical Center, San Francisco, California;
(5)Division of Nephrology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Frailty is common among patients on dialysis and
increases vulnerability to dependency and death.
DESIGN, SETTING, PARTICIPANTS, & MEASUREMENTS: We examined the predictive ability
of frailty on the basis of physical performance and self-reported function in
participants of a US Renal Data System special study that enrolled a convenience 
sample of 771 prevalent patients on hemodialysis from 14 facilities in the
Atlanta and northern California areas from 2009 to 2011. Performance-based
frailty was assessed using direct measures of grip strength (weakness) and gait
speed along with weight loss, exhaustion, and low physical activity; poor
self-reported function was substituted for weakness and slow gait speed in the
self-reported function-based definition. For both definitions, patients meeting
three or more criteria were considered frail.
RESULTS: The mean age of 762 patients included in analyses was 57.1±14.2 years
old; 240 patients (31%) met the physical performance-based definition of frailty,
and 396 (52%) met the self-reported function-based definition. There were 106
deaths during 1.7 (interquartile range, 1.4-2.4) years of follow-up. After
adjusting for demographic and clinical characteristics, the hazard ratio (HR) for
mortality for the performance-based definition (2.16; 95% confidence interval
[95% CI], 1.41 to 3.29) was slightly higher than that of the self-reported
function-based definition (HR, 1.93; 95% CI, 1.24 to 3.00). Patients who met the 
self-report-based definition but not the physical performance definition of
frailty (n=192) were not at statistically significantly higher risk of mortality 
than those who were not frail by either definition (n=330; HR, 1.41; 95% CI, 0.81
to 2.45), but those who met both definitions of frailty (n=204) were at
significantly higher risk (HR, 2.46; 95% CI, 1.51 to 4.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Frailty, defined using either direct tests of physical performance
or self-reported physical function, was associated with higher mortality among
patients receiving hemodialysis. Future studies are needed to determine the
utility of assessing frailty in clinical practice.

Copyright © 2016 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.2215/CJN.03710415 
PMCID: PMC4822658
PMID: 26792529  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Am J Transplant. 2016 Jul;16(7):2097-105. doi: 10.1111/ajt.13723. Epub 2016 Apr
5.

Gender Disparities in Access to Pediatric Renal Transplantation in Europe: Data
From the ESPN/ERA-EDTA Registry.

Hogan J(1)(2), Couchoud C(1), Bonthuis M(3), Groothoff JW(4)(5), Jager KJ(3),
Schaefer F(6), Van Stralen KJ(3); ESPN/ERA-EDTA Registry.

Collaborators: Shitza D, Kramar R, Oberbauer R, Baiko S, Sukalo A, van Hoeck K,
Collart F, des Grottes JM, Pokrajac D, Resić H, Prnjavorac B, Roussinov D,
Batinić D, Lemac M, Slavicek J, Seeman T, Vondrak K, Heaf JG, Toots U, Finne P,
Grönhagen-Riska C, Lasalle M, Sahpazova E, Gersdorf G, Barth C, Scholz C,
Tönshoff B, Ioannidis G, Kapogiannis A, Papachristou F, Reusz G, Túri S, Szabó L,
Szabó T, Györke ZS, Kis E, Palsson R, Edvardsson V, Gianoglio B, de Palo T,
Pecoraro C, Picca S, Testa S, Vidal E, Mencarelli F, Jankauskiene A, Pundziene B,
Said-Conti V, Gatcan S, Berbeca O, Zaikova N, Pavićević S, Leivestad T, Bjerre A,
Zurowska A, Zagozdzon I, Mota C, Almeida M, Afonso C, Mircescu G, Garneata L,
Podgoreanu E, Molchanova EA, Tomilina NA, Bikbov BT, Kostic M, Peco-Antic A,
Puric S, Kruscic D, Spasojevic-Dimitrijeva B, Milosecski-Lomic G, Paripovic D,
Podracka L, Kolvek G, Buturovic-Ponikvar J, Novljan G, Battelino N, Alonso Melgar
A, Schön S, Prütz KG, Seeberger A, Backmän L, Evans M, Kuenhi CE, Maurer E, Laube
G, Simometi G, Hoitsma A, Hemke A, Topaloglu R, Duzova A, Ivanov D, Sinha M.

Author information: 
(1)REIN Registry, Agence de la Biomédecine, La Plaine Saint-Denis, France.
(2)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Robert Debré University Hospital, Paris,
France.
(3)ESPN/ERA-EDTA Registry and ERA-EDTA Registry, Department of Medical
Informatics, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Emma Children's Hospital AMC, Amsterdam,
the Netherlands.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Emma Children's Hospital AMC, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands.
(6)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, University of Heidelberg Centre for
Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Heidelberg, Germany.

Inequalities between genders in access to transplantation have been demonstrated.
We aimed to validate this gender inequality in a large pediatric population and
to investigate its causes. This cohort study included 6454 patients starting
renal replacement therapy before 18 years old, in 35 countries participating in
the European Society for Paediatric Nephrology/European Renal
Association-European Dialysis and Transplant Association Registry. We used
cumulative incidence competing risk and proportional hazards frailty models to
study the time to receive a transplant and hierarchical logistic regression to
investigate access to preemptive transplantation. Girls had a slower access to
renal transplantation because of a 23% lower probability of receiving preemptive 
transplantation. We found a longer follow-up time before renal replacement
therapy in boys compared with girls despite a similar estimated glomerular
filtration rate at first appointment. Girls tend to progress faster toward
end-stage renal disease than boys, which may contribute to a shorter time
available for pretransplantation workup. Overall, medical factors explained only 
70% of the gender difference. In Europe, girls have less access to preemptive
transplantation for reasons that are only partially related to medical factors.
Nonmedical factors such as patient motivation and parent and physician attitudes 
toward transplantation and organ donation may contribute to this inequality. Our 
study should raise awareness for the management of girls with renal diseases.

© Copyright 2016 The American Society of Transplantation and the American Society
of Transplant Surgeons.

DOI: 10.1111/ajt.13723 
PMID: 26783738  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Antivir Ther. 2016;21(5):441-5. doi: 10.3851/IMP3017. Epub 2016 Jan 5.

Tenofovir/emtricitabine metabolites and endogenous nucleotide exposures are
associated with p16(INK4a) expression in subjects on combination therapy.

Dumond JB(1), Francis O, Cottrell M, Trezza C, Prince HM, Mollan K, Sykes C,
Torrice C, White N, Malone S, Wang R, Van Dam C, Patterson KB, Hudgens MG,
Sharpless NE, Forrest A.

Author information: 
(1)UNC Eshelman School of Pharmacy, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
Chapel Hill, NC, USA. jdumond@unc.edu.

BACKGROUND: HIV may amplify immunological, physiological and functional changes
of ageing. We determined associations of frailty phenotype, a T-cell senescence
marker (p16(INK4a) expression), age and demographics with exposures of the
intracellular metabolites (IM) and endogenous nucleotides (EN) of
tenofovir/emtricitabine (TFV/FTC), efavirenz (EFV), atazanavir (ATV) and
ritonavir (RTV).
METHODS: Plasma and peripheral blood mononuclear cell samples for drug, IM and EN
concentrations were collected at four time points in HIV+ adults receiving
TFV/FTC with EFV or ATV/RTV. Subjects underwent frailty phenotyping and
p16(INK4a) expression analysis. Non-compartmental analysis generated an area
under the curve (AUC) for each analyte. Spearman rank correlation and
Kruskal-Wallis tests were used to assess associations between AUC, demographics
and ageing markers, adjusting for multiple comparisons with the Holm procedure.
RESULTS: Subjects (n=79) ranged in age from 22-73 years (median 48 years); 48
were African-American, 24 were female, 54 received EFV. Three subjects (range
51-60 years) demonstrated frailty, with 17 subjects (range 26-60 years)
demonstrating pre-frailty. Negative associations were observed between p16(INK4a)
expression and each of FTC-triphosphate (r=-0.45), deoxyadenosine triphosphate
(dATP; r=-0.47) and deoxycytidine triphosphate (dCTP; r=-0.57) AUCs (P-values
<0.02). TFV and FTC AUCs were larger among subjects with lower renal function or 
higher chronological age (P-values ≤0.05). No associations were observed for EFV,
ATV or RTV AUCs.
CONCLUSIONS: Associations of IM/EN exposure and p16(INK4a) expression observed
here suggest that senescence may alter drug phosphorylation, metabolism or
transport. This finding warrants further mechanistic study to ensure optimal
treatment in the ageing HIV+ population. Clinicaltrials.gov NCT01180075.

DOI: 10.3851/IMP3017 
PMCID: PMC5266614
PMID: 26731175  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2016 Mar 7;11(3):431-41. doi: 10.2215/CJN.06290615. Epub
2016 Jan 4.

Trends in Survival and Renal Recovery in Patients with Multiple Myeloma or
Light-Chain Amyloidosis on Chronic Dialysis.

Decourt A(1), Gondouin B(1), Delaroziere JC(2), Brunet P(1), Sallée M(1), Burtey 
S(1), Dussol B(1), Ivanov V(3), Costello R(3), Couchoud C(4), Jourde-Chiche N(5).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Nephrology.
(2)Public Health, and.
(3)Immuno-Hematology, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Marseille, Conception
Hospital, Aix-Marseille University, Marseille, France; and.
(4)French Biomedical Agency, Renal Epidemiology and Information Network Registry,
St. Denis, France.
(5)Departments of *Nephrology, noemie.jourde@ap-hm.fr.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Monoclonal gammopathies (MGs) with renal involvement
can lead to ESRD caused by myeloma cast nephropathy (MCN), immunoglobulin light
chain amyloidosis (ALA), or light-chain deposition disease (LCDD). Few studies
have focused on the prognosis of patients with MG on chronic dialysis. We
evaluated the outcomes of patients with MG incident on chronic dialysis in
France.
DESIGN, SETTING, PARTICIPANTS, & MEASUREMENTS: All incident patients registered
in the Renal Epidemiology and Information Network Registry between 2002 and 2011 
with ESRD caused by ALA, LCDD, or MCN were included. Patient's survival, censored
for renal transplantation, renal recovery, and loss to follow-up, as well as
renal outcomes were analyzed and compared with a control group. Risk factors and 
causes of death were analyzed.
RESULTS: We included 1459 patients, comprising 265 (18%) patients with ALA, 334
(23%) patients with LCDD, and 861 (59%) patients with MCN. Median age was 72
years, and 56% were men. Median follow-up was 13.1 months. Renal recovery was
observed in 9.1% of patients and more frequent after 2006. Kidney transplantation
was rare in this population (2.3%). Among 1272 patients who remained on dialysis,
67% died. Median survival on dialysis was 18.3 months. Main causes of death were 
malignancies (34.4%), cardiovascular diseases (18%), infections (13.3%), and
cachexia (5.2%). Independent risk factors of death were age (hazard ratio [HR],
1.03 per year increase; 95% confidence interval [95% CI], 1.02 to 1.03), frailty 
(HR, 1.93; 95% CI, 1.58 to 2.36), congestive heart failure (HR, 1.54; 95% CI,
1.23 to 1.93), and dialysis initiation on a central catheter (HR, 1.40; 95% CI,
1.11 to 1.75). Factors associated with a lower risk of death were year of
dialysis initiation (HR, 0.95 per year increase; 95% CI, 0.91 to 0.99) and high
BP (HR, 0.80; 95% CI, 0.67 to 0.97).
CONCLUSIONS: Survival of patients with ALA, LCDD, or MCN on chronic dialysis is
poor but has improved over time. Progressive malignancy is the main cause of
death in this population. Renal recovery has increased since 2006.

Copyright © 2016 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.2215/CJN.06290615 
PMCID: PMC4791812
PMID: 26728585  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Frailty Aging. 2016;5(3):174-9.

Frailty and Health-Related Quality of Life in End Stage Renal Disease Patients of
All Ages.

McAdams-DeMarco MA, Ying H, Olorundare I, King EA, Desai N, Dagher N, Lonze B,
Montgomery R, Walston J, Segev DL.

BACKGROUND: Frailty is associated with worse health-related quality of life
(HRQOL) in older adults and worse clinical outcomes in adults of all ages with
end stage renal disease (ESRD). It is unclear whether frail adults of all ages
with ESRD are more likely to experience worse HRQOL. OBJECTIVE: The goal of this 
study was to identify factors associated with worsening HRQOL in this population.
DESIGN, SETTING AND MEASUREMENTS: We studied 233 adults of all ages with ESRD
enrolled (11/2009-11/2013) in a longitudinal cohort study. Frailty status was
measured at enrollment and HRQOL was reported (Excellent, Very Good, Good, Fair
or Poor) at the initial assessment and follow-up (median follow-up 9.4 months).
We studied factors associated with Fair/Poor HRQOL at follow-up using logistic
regression and factors associated with HRQOL change using multinomial regression.
All models were adjusted for age, sex, race, education, BMI, diabetes status,
history of a previous transplant, type of dialysis and time between assessments. 
RESULTS: Fair/Poor HRQOL was reported by 28% at initial assessment and 33% at
follow-up. 47.2% of participants had stable HRQOL, 22.8% better HRQOL, and 30.0% 
worse HRQOL at follow-up (P<0.001). In adjusted models, only frailty was
associated with Fair/Poor HRQOL at follow-up (OR: 2.79, 95% CI: 1.32-5.90) and
worsening HRQOL at follow-up (RR: 2.91, 95%CI: 1.08-7.80). CONCLUSIONS: Frail
adults of all ages with ESRD are more likely to experience fair/poor HRQOL and
worsening HRQOL over time. Frailty represents a state of decreased physiologic
reserve that impacts not only clinical outcomes but also the patient-centered
outcome of HRQOL.


PMCID: PMC6205225
PMID: 29240319  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2016 Jan;9(1):23-30. doi:
10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.115.002053. Epub 2015 Dec 29.

Geriatric Conditions in Patients Undergoing Defibrillator Implantation for
Prevention of Sudden Cardiac Death: Prevalence and Impact on Mortality.

Green AR(1), Leff B(2), Wang Y(2), Spatz ES(2), Masoudi FA(2), Peterson PN(2),
Daugherty SL(2), Matlock DD(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Geriatric Medicine and Gerontology, Department of
Medicine, School of Medicine (A.R.G., B.L.); Department of Health Policy and
Management, Bloomberg School of Public Health (B.L), Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD; Department of Community and Public Health, Johns Hopkins School of
Nursing, Baltimore, MD (B.L.); Section of Cardiovascular Medicine (Y.W., E.S.S.),
Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT; Center for Outcomes Research and
Evaluation (Y.W., E.S.S.), Yale/Yale-New Haven Hospital Systems, New Haven, CT;
Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine (F.A.M., P.N.P., S.L.D.) and
Division of Geriatrics, Department of Medicine (D.D.M.), University of Colorado, 
Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO; Colorado Cardiovascular Outcomes Research
Consortium (F.A.M., S.L.D., D.D.M., P.N.P.), Denver, CO; Division of Cardiology, 
Department of Medicine (P.N.P.), Denver Health Medical Center, Denver, CO.
ariel@jhmi.edu.
(2)From the Division of Geriatric Medicine and Gerontology, Department of
Medicine, School of Medicine (A.R.G., B.L.); Department of Health Policy and
Management, Bloomberg School of Public Health (B.L), Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD; Department of Community and Public Health, Johns Hopkins School of
Nursing, Baltimore, MD (B.L.); Section of Cardiovascular Medicine (Y.W., E.S.S.),
Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT; Center for Outcomes Research and
Evaluation (Y.W., E.S.S.), Yale/Yale-New Haven Hospital Systems, New Haven, CT;
Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine (F.A.M., P.N.P., S.L.D.) and
Division of Geriatrics, Department of Medicine (D.D.M.), University of Colorado, 
Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO; Colorado Cardiovascular Outcomes Research
Consortium (F.A.M., S.L.D., D.D.M., P.N.P.), Denver, CO; Division of Cardiology, 
Department of Medicine (P.N.P.), Denver Health Medical Center, Denver, CO.

BACKGROUND: Geriatric conditions may influence outcomes among patients receiving 
implantable cardioverter-defibrillators (ICDs). We sought to determine the
prevalence of frailty and dementia among older adults receiving primary
prevention ICDs and to determine the impact of multimorbidity on mortality within
1 year of ICD implantation.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The cohort included 83 792 Medicare patients from the
National Cardiovascular Data Registry ICD Registry who underwent first primary
prevention ICD implantation between 2006 and 2009. These data were merged with
Medicare analytic files to determine the prevalence of frailty, dementia, and
other conditions before ICD implantation, as well as 1-year mortality. A
validated claim-based algorithm was used to identify frail patients. Mutually
exclusive patterns of chronic conditions were examined. The association of each
pattern with 1-year mortality was assessed using logistic regression models
adjusted for selected patient characteristics. Approximately 1 in 10 Medicare
patients with heart failure receiving a primary prevention ICD had frailty (10%) 
or dementia (1%). One-year mortality was 22% for patients with frailty, 27% for
patients with dementia, and 12% in the overall cohort. Several multimorbidity
patterns were associated with high 1-year mortality rates: dementia with frailty 
(29%), frailty with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (25%), and frailty with
diabetes mellitus (23%). These patterns were present in 8% of the cohort.
CONCLUSIONS: More than 10% of Medicare beneficiaries with heart failure receiving
primary prevention ICDs have frailty or dementia. These patients had
significantly higher 1-year mortality than those with other common chronic
conditions. Frailty and dementia should be considered in clinical decision-making
and guideline development.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.115.002053 
PMCID: PMC4759659
PMID: 26715650  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2016 Mar 7;11(3):423-30. doi: 10.2215/CJN.01050115. Epub
2015 Dec 28.

Quality of Life and Physical Function in Older Patients on Dialysis: A Comparison
of Assisted Peritoneal Dialysis with Hemodialysis.

Iyasere OU(1), Brown EA(2), Johansson L(1), Huson L(3), Smee J(4), Maxwell AP(5),
Farrington K(6), Davenport A(7).

Author information: 
(1)Imperial College Renal and Transplant Centre, Hammersmith Hospital, London,
United Kingdom;
(2)Imperial College Renal and Transplant Centre, Hammersmith Hospital, London,
United Kingdom; o.iyasere13@imperial.ac.uk.
(3)Centre for Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Division of Experimental Medicine,
Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom;
(4)Cardiovascular and Renal Research Support Unit, Imperial College Healthcare
National Health Service Trust, London, United Kingdom;
(5)Centre for Public Health, School of Medicine, Dentistry and Biomedical
Sciences, Queens University, Belfast, United Kingdom;
(6)Renal Department, Lister Hospital, Stevenage, United Kingdom; and.
(7)University College London Centre for Nephrology, Royal Free Hospital, London, 
United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: In-center hemodialysis (HD) is often the default
dialysis modality for older patients. Few centers use assisted peritoneal
dialysis (PD), which enables treatment at home. This observational study compared
quality of life (QoL) and physical function between older patients on assisted PD
and HD.
DESIGN, SETTING, PARTICIPANTS, & MEASUREMENTS: Patients on assisted PD who were
>60 years old and on dialysis for >3 months were recruited and matched to
patients on HD (needing hospital transport) by age, sex, diabetes, dialysis
vintage, ethnicity, and index of deprivation. Frailty was assessed using the
Clinical Frailty Scale. QoL assessments included Hospital Anxiety and Depression 
Scale (HADS), Short Form-12, Palliative Outcomes Symptom Scale (renal), Illness
Intrusiveness Rating Scale, and Renal Treatment Satisfaction Questionnaire
(RTSQ). Physical function was evaluated by Barthel Score and timed up and go
test.
RESULTS: In total, 251 patients (129 PD and 122 HD) were recruited. In unadjusted
analysis, patients on assisted PD had a higher prevalence of possible depression 
(HADS>8; PD=38.8%; HD=23.8%; P=0.05) and higher HADS depression score (median:
PD=6; HD=5; P=0.05) but higher RTSQ scores (median: PD=55; HD=51; P<0.01). In a
generalized linear regression model adjusting for age, sex, comorbidity, dialysis
vintage, and frailty, assisted PD continued to be associated with higher RTSQ
scores (P=0.04) but not with other QoL measures.
CONCLUSIONS: There are no differences in measures of QoL and physical function
between older patients on assisted PD and comparable patients on HD, except for
treatment satisfaction, which is higher in patients on PD. Assisted PD should be 
considered as an alternative to HD for older patients, allowing them to make
their preferred choices.

Copyright © 2016 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.2215/CJN.01050115 
PMCID: PMC4785682
PMID: 26712808  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Adv Chronic Kidney Dis. 2016 Jan;23(1):44-50. doi: 10.1053/j.ackd.2015.11.002.

Kidney Transplantation Among the Elderly: Challenges and Opportunities to Improve
Outcomes.

Singh P(1), Ng YH(1), Unruh M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of New
Mexico.
(2)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of New
Mexico. Electronic address: mlunruh@salud.unm.edu.

Elderly patients (>65 years old) represent the fastest growing population among
the ESRD patients and those awaiting kidney transplantation. There is ample
evidence to suggest that kidney transplant in the elderly population offers the
best chance of survival and improves health-related quality of life compared to
remaining on dialysis. Although all these emerging facts are encouraging, this
population brings with them complex medical problems including frailty, cognitive
impairment, and multiple comorbidities. These issues can be barriers to
transplantation and threaten the well-being of the patients after
transplantation. Furthermore, aging results in changes to the immune system and
affects the pharmacokinetics of immunosuppressants. All these changes can
increase risk of complications such as infections and malignancy. Because death
with a functioning graft is a common cause of graft loss, the new kidney
allocation system has been implemented in an attempt to maximize allograft
utilization and minimize unrealized graft years. This may result in longer
wait-times for the elderly. In this review, we will highlight the barriers to
kidney transplant, characterize transplant-related issues in the elderly, and
propose alternative strategies under the new allocation system.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1053/j.ackd.2015.11.002 
PMID: 26709062  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Adv Chronic Kidney Dis. 2016 Jan;23(1):36-43. doi: 10.1053/j.ackd.2015.08.005.

End-Stage Kidney Disease in the Elderly: Approach to Dialysis Initiation,
Choosing Modality, and Predicting Outcomes.

Berger JR(1), Jaikaransingh V(1), Hedayati SS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX; and Renal Section, Medical Service,
Veterans Affairs North Texas Health Care System, Dallas, TX.
(2)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX; and Renal Section, Medical Service,
Veterans Affairs North Texas Health Care System, Dallas, TX. Electronic address: 
susan.hedayati@utsouthwestern.edu.

The number of patients with end-stage kidney disease 65 years and older is
growing, and this growth is expected to continue. The presence of medical
comorbidities, limited life expectancy, frailty, and poor functional status in
these patients poses substantial challenges in clinical decision-making and
provision of optimal care. Frailty is more common in elderly patients with CKD
than without and is associated with poor outcomes. Several prognostic tools were 
developed to estimate the rate of CKD progression among elderly, and risk of
mortality after dialysis initiation. Risk factors for CKD progression among
elderly include low estimated glomerular filtration rate, high baseline
proteinuria, acute kidney injury, low serum albumin, and presence of congestive
heart failure. The decision to initiate dialysis in the elderly should take into 
consideration life expectancy, risks and benefits of each dialysis modality,
quality of life, and patient and caregiver preferences. This article discusses
common issues in the elderly with end-stage kidney disease, with particular
emphasis on the impact of frailty and functional status, choice of dialysis
modality and vascular access, and prognosis after dialysis initiation, to assist 
the nephrologist in making decisions regarding optimal care for this complex
group of patients.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1053/j.ackd.2015.08.005 
PMID: 26709061  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Transplantation. 2016 Apr;100(4):727-33. doi: 10.1097/TP.0000000000001003.

Frailty and Transplantation.

Exterkate L(1), Slegtenhorst BR, Kelm M, Seyda M, Schuitenmaker JM, Quante M,
Uehara H, El Khal A, Tullius SG.

Author information: 
(1)1 Division of Transplant Surgery and Transplant Surgery Research Laboratory,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA. 2 Surgical
Research Laboratory, Department of Surgery, University Medical Center Groningen, 
Groningen, The Netherlands. 3 Division of Transplant Surgery, Department of
Surgery, Erasmus MC-University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. 4
Institute of Transplant Immunology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Lower
Saxony, Germany. 5 Department of Visceral, Transplantation, Thoracic and Vascular
Surgery, University Hospital Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. 6 Department of Urology, 
Osaka Medical College, Takatsuki, Osaka, Japan.

Consequences of aging are gaining clinical relevance. In transplantation, aging
and immunosenescence impact treatment and outcomes. The impact of aging, however,
will critically depend on distinguishing healthy, chronological aging from
biological aging that may result into frailty. Approximately 15% of individuals
older than 65 years are frail, and it is expected that this condition will gain
more clinical relevance with an expected increase to greater than 20% over the
next 5 years. Clearly, frailty impacts various general aspects of health care and
organ transplantation in particular including patient selection, waitlist
management and treatment after transplantation. In general, frailty has been
characterized by a compromised physiological reserve and an augmented
vulnerability. In comparison to healthy aging, inflammatory markers and cytokines
are increased in frail older adults. Thus, modifications of the immune response, 
in addition to physical limitations and changes of metabolism, are likely to
impact outcomes after transplantation. Here, we provide a risk assessment of
frailty at the time of transplant evaluation and review effects on outcomes and
recovery after transplantation. Moreover, we summarize our current understanding 
of the pathophysiology of frailty and consequences on immune responses and
metabolism.

DOI: 10.1097/TP.0000000000001003 
PMID: 26703348  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Local Reg Anesth. 2015 Dec 2;8:101-4. doi: 10.2147/LRA.S86390. eCollection 2015.

Thoracic combined spinal epidural anesthesia for laparoscopic cholecystectomy in 
a geriatric patient with ischemic heart disease and renal insufficiency.

Mehta N(1), Gupta S(1), Sharma A(1), Dar MR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care, Acharya Shri Chander College 
of Medical Sciences and Hospital, Jammu, Jammu and Kashmir, India.

Older people undergoing any surgery have a higher incidence of morbidity and
mortality, resulting from a decline in physiological reserves, associated
comorbidities, polypharmacy, cognitive dysfunction, and frailty. Most of the
clinical trials comparing regional versus general anesthesia in elderly have
failed to establish superiority of any single technique. However, the ideal
approach in elderly is to be least invasive, thus minimizing alterations in
homeostasis. The goal of anesthetic management in laparoscopic procedures
includes management of pneumoperitoneum, achieving an adequate level of sensory
blockade without any respiratory compromise, management of shoulder tip pain,
provision of adequate postoperative pain relief, and early ambulation. Regional
anesthesia fulfills all the aforementioned criteria and aids in quick recovery
and thus has been suggested to be a suitable alternative to general anesthesia
for laparoscopic surgeries, particularly in patients who are at high risk while
under general anesthesia or for patients unwilling to undergo general anesthesia.
In conclusion, we report results of successful management with thoracic combined 
spinal epidural for laparoscopic cholecystectomy of a geriatric patient with
ischemic heart disease with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and renal
insufficiency.

DOI: 10.2147/LRA.S86390 
PMCID: PMC4671810
PMID: 26664202 


248. Blood Purif. 2015;40(4):288-92. doi: 10.1159/000441575. Epub 2015 Nov 17.

The Frail Dialysis Population: A Growing Burden for the Dialysis Community.

Johansen KL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.

Comment on
    J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2001 Mar;56(3):M146-56.

BACKGROUND: The dialysis population is aging worldwide. It is well known that
patients on dialysis have limited functional status, but only recently has
frailty been considered.
SUMMARY: The prevalence of frailty among patients on dialysis ranges from 3.4- to
10-fold higher than among community-dwelling elderly, depending on the method of 
assessing frailty and patient characteristics. Despite its high prevalence and
the high overall mortality in the dialysis population, frailty is associated with
higher mortality, independent of clinical and demographic characteristics and
comorbidity. The prevalence of frailty among patients with non-dialysis-dependent
chronic kidney disease (CKD) is also high, and cross-sectional data suggest that 
the prevalence may increase as CKD progresses. Thus, interventions to improve
frailty have the potential to improve quality of life and mortality. Although
interventions to improve physical dysfunction have been successful in the
population with end-stage renal disease, no studies have specifically targeted
frail individuals. Therefore, the extent to which exercise or physical activity
interventions are feasible among frail patients and can improve frailty urgently 
needs to be examined. In the meantime, providers should refer frail patients to
physical therapists and encourage them to be more active if possible. In
addition, more attention should be focused on the possibility that rehabilitation
among patients with earlier stages of CKD could improve dialysis outcomes.
KEY MESSAGES: Frailty is extremely common among patients on dialysis and is
independently associated with adverse outcomes. Providers should take advantage
of available resources to improve functioning in this population, and research
should address the optimal strategy for addressing frailty, including timing of
intervention.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000441575 
PMID: 26656296  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


249. BMC Nephrol. 2015 Dec 9;16:203. doi: 10.1186/s12882-015-0202-6.

Association of Frailty based on self-reported physical function with directly
measured kidney function and mortality.

Delgado C(1)(2), Grimes BA(3), Glidden DV(4), Shlipak M(5), Sarnak MJ(6),
Johansen KL(7)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Nephrology Section, San Francisco VA Medical Center, San Francisco, CA, USA.
Cynthia.Delgado@ucsf.edu.
(2)Division of Nephrology, University of California, 521 Parnassus Ave, Box 0532,
San Francisco, CA, 94143, USA. Cynthia.Delgado@ucsf.edu.
(3)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California, San
Francisco, CA, USA. BGrimes@psg.ucsf.edu.
(4)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California, San
Francisco, CA, USA. David.Glidden@ucsf.edu.
(5)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
Michael.Shlipak@ucsf.edu.
(6)Division of Nephrology, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA.
msarnak@tuftsmedicalcenter.org.
(7)Nephrology Section, San Francisco VA Medical Center, San Francisco, CA, USA.
Kirsten.Johansen@ucsf.edu.
(8)Division of Nephrology, University of California, 521 Parnassus Ave, Box 0532,
San Francisco, CA, 94143, USA. Kirsten.Johansen@ucsf.edu.

BACKGROUND: Use of serum creatinine to estimate GFR may lead to underestimation
of the association between self-reported frailty and kidney function. Our
objectives were to evaluate the association of measured GFR (mGFR) with
self-reported frailty among patients with CKD and to determine whether
self-reported frailty was associated with death after adjusting for mGFR.
METHODS: Participants in the Modification of Diet in Renal Disease study
(1989-1993) had GFR measured using iothalamate clearance (mGFR), and GFR was
estimated based on the CKD-EPI creatinine (eGFRcr) and cystatin C (eGFRcys)
equations. We defined self-reported frailty as three or more of: exhaustion, poor
physical function, low physical activity, and low body weight. Death was
ascertained through 2007 using the National Death Index and the United States
Renal Data System.
RESULTS: Eight hundred twelve MDRD participants (97 %) had complete data on
self-reported frailty (16 % prevalence, N = 130) and mGFR (mean (SD) 33.1 ± 11.7 
ml/min/1.73 m(2)). Higher GFR was associated with lower odds of self-reported
frailty based on mGFR, (OR 0.71, 95 % CI 0.60-0.86 per 10 ml/min/1.73 m(2)),
eGFRcr (OR 0.80, 95 % CI 0.67-0.94 per 10 ml/min/1.73 m(2)), and eGFRcys (OR
0.75, 95 % CI 0.62-0.90 per 10 ml/min/1.73 m(2)). Median follow-up was 17 (IQR
11-18) years, with 371 deaths. Self-reported frailty was associated with a higher
risk of death (HR 1.71, 95 % CI 1.26-2.30), which was attenuated to a similar
degree when mGFR (HR 1.48, 95 % CI 1.08-2.00), eGFRcr (HR 1.57, 95 % CI
1.15-2.10), or eGFRcys (HR 1.51, 95 % CI 1.10-2.10) was included as an indicator 
of kidney function.
CONCLUSIONS: We found an inverse association between kidney function and
self-reported frailty that was similar for mGFR, eGFR and eGFRcys. In this
relatively healthy cohort of clinical trial participants with CKD, using serum
creatinine to estimate GFR did not substantially alter the association of GFR
with self-reported frailty or of self-reported frailty with death.

DOI: 10.1186/s12882-015-0202-6 
PMCID: PMC4673778
PMID: 26645070  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


250. BMJ Open. 2015 Dec 1;5(12):e008737. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-008737.

Risk factors for hospital admission in the 28 days following a community-acquired
pneumonia diagnosis in older adults, and their contribution to increasing
hospitalisation rates over time: a cohort study.

Millett ER(1), De Stavola BL(1), Quint JK(1), Smeeth L(1), Thomas SL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Epidemiology and Population Health, London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, London, UK.

OBJECTIVES: To determine factors associated with hospitalisation after
community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) among older adults in England, and to
investigate how these factors have contributed to increasing hospitalisations
over time.
DESIGN: Cohort study.
SETTING: Primary and secondary care in England.
POPULATION: 39,211 individuals from the Clinical Practice Research Datalink, who 
were eligible for linkage to Hospital Episode Statistics and mortality data, were
aged ≥ 65 and had at least 1 CAP episode between April 1998 and March 2011.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The association between hospitalisation within 28 days of 
CAP diagnosis (a 'post-CAP' hospitalisation) and a wide range of comorbidities,
frailty factors, medications and vaccinations. We examined the role of these
factors in post-CAP hospitalisation trends. We also looked at trends in post-CAP 
mortality and length of hospitalisation over the study period.
RESULTS: 14 comorbidities, 5 frailty factors and 4 medications/vaccinations were 
associated with hospitalisation (of 18, 12 and 7 considered, respectively).
Factors such as chronic lung disease, severe renal disease and diabetes were
associated with increased likelihood of hospitalisation, whereas factors such as 
recent influenza vaccination and a recent antibiotic prescription decreased the
odds of hospitalisation. Despite adjusting for these and other factors, the
average predicted probability of hospitalisation after CAP rose markedly from 57%
(1998-2000) to 86% (2009-2010). Duration of hospitalisation and 28-day mortality 
decreased over the study period.
CONCLUSIONS: The risk factors we describe enable identification of patients at
increased likelihood of post-CAP hospitalisation and thus in need of proactive
case management. Our analyses also provide evidence that while comorbidities and 
frailty factors contributed to increasing post-CAP hospitalisations in recent
years, the trend appears to be largely driven by changes in service provision and
patient behaviour.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-008737 
PMCID: PMC4679905
PMID: 26631055  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 2016 Jul;88(1):135-43. doi: 10.1002/ccd.26336. Epub
2015 Nov 25.

Vascular complication can be minimized with a balloon-expandable, re-collapsible 
sheath in TAVR with a self-expanding bioprosthesis.

Abu Saleh WK(1), Tang GH(2), Ahmad H(3), Cohen M(3), Undemir C(2), Lansman SL(2),
Reyes M(4), Barker CM(4), Kleiman NS(4), Reardon MJ(1), Ramlawi B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Houston Methodist DeBakey Heart & Vascular Center, Department of
Cardiovascular Surgery, Houston Methodist Hospital, Houston, Texas.
(2)Section of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Westchester Medical Center, New York
Medical College, Valhalla, New York.
(3)Division of Cardiology, Westchester Medical Center, New York Medical College, 
Valhalla, New York.
(4)Department of Cardiology, Houston Methodist DeBakey Heart and Vascular Center,
Houston, Texas.

OBJECTIVE: This study evaluates the feasibility and safety of a
balloon-expandable, re-collapsible sheath for TAVR patients, including those with
small iliofemoral access (≤5.0 mm).
BACKGROUND: The recommended iliofemoral diameter for the CoreValve TAVR system is
≥6.0 mm, but the lowest limit has not been determined.
METHODS: Of 322 consecutive patients who underwent TAVR from 1/2014 to 8/2015 at 
two institutions, 64 underwent transfemoral CoreValve implantation, using an
11/19-French balloon-expandable, re-collapsible sheath, which has a 4.45 mm outer
diameter (OD) on arterial entry, expands to 7.67 mm, then re-collapses upon
removal. Valve sizing and vascular access were determined by computed tomography,
and outcomes were assessed using the Valve Academic Research Consortium 2
(VARC-2) definitions.
RESULTS: Thirteen of 64 patients had a minimal iliofemoral artery luminal
diameter (MLD) of ≤5.0 mm (mean 4.38+/-0.59 mm, range 3.1-5.0 mm), with vessel
calcification ≤90° to 360° and tortuosity <45° to >90°. At the MLD point, the
sheath-to-artery ratios, based on the fully expanded 7.67 mm OD, ranged
1.53-2.47, higher than previously reported ratios that risk vascular
complications. Major comorbidities included chronic renal failure, severe chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease, extreme thrombocytopenia, cirrhosis, prior cardiac
surgery, poor ventricular function, and frailty. All 64 patients had TAVR with IV
sedation and local anesthesia, with 0% sheath malfunction, 0% vascular
complications, and 0% bleeding in-hospital and at 30 days per VARC-2 definitions.
CONCLUSIONS: TAVR using a balloon-expandable, re-collapsible sheath is safe,
including in small iliofemoral access ≤5.0 mm, thus considerably expanding the
population suitable for transfemoral approach. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ccd.26336 
PMID: 26603266  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Am J Cardiol. 2015 Dec 15;116(12):1916-22. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2015.09.030.
Epub 2015 Oct 9.

Outcomes of Patients at Estimated Low, Intermediate, and High Risk Undergoing
Transcatheter Aortic Valve Implantation for Aortic Stenosis.

Barbash IM(1), Finkelstein A(2), Barsheshet A(3), Segev A(4), Steinvil A(2),
Assali A(3), Ben Gal Y(2), Vaknin Assa H(3), Fefer P(4), Sagie A(3), Guetta V(4),
Kornowski R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Leviev Heart Center, Sheba Medical Center, Ramat Gan, Israel; The Sackler
School of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Israel. Electronic address:
ibarbash@gmail.com.
(2)The Sackler School of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Israel; Department of
Cardiology, Tel-Aviv Medical Center, Tel-Aviv, Israel.
(3)The Sackler School of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Israel; Cardiology
Department, Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel.
(4)Leviev Heart Center, Sheba Medical Center, Ramat Gan, Israel; The Sackler
School of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Israel.

Intermediate- or low-risk patients with severe aortic stenosis were excluded from
earlier transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI) clinical trials; however, 
they are already being treated by TAVI despite a lack of data regarding the
safety and efficacy in these patients. We aimed to assess the safety and efficacy
of TAVI in patients at intermediate or low risk. Patients undergoing TAVI during 
2008 to 2014 were included into a shared database (n = 1,327). Procedural
outcomes were adjudicated according to Valve Academic Research Consortium 2
definitions. Patients were stratified according to their Society of Thoracic
Surgeons (STS) score into 3 groups: high (STS ≥8, n = 223, 17%), intermediate
(STS 4 to 8; n = 496, 38%), or low risk (STS <4; n = 576, 45%). Low-risk patients
were significantly younger and more likely to be men compared to intermediate-
and high-risk patients. Baseline characteristics differed significantly between
the groups with a gradual increase in the rates of previous bypass surgery,
stroke, peripheral vascular disease, renal failure, lung disease, and frailty
scores, from low to high risk groups. Compared with intermediate- and high-risk
patients, low-risk patients were more likely to undergo TAVI through the
transfemoral route (81% vs 88% vs 95%, p <0.001) and under conscious sedation
(69% vs 72% vs 81%, <0.001). There were no significant differences in the rates
of procedural complications apart from acute kidney injury (19% vs 17% vs 13%, p 
= 0.03) and stroke rates (4.5% vs 2% vs 2.3%, p = 0.1). Short- and long-term
mortality rates were significantly higher for intermediate- (hazard ratio [HR]
1.9, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.2 to 2.9) and high-risk patients (HR 4.1, 95%
CI 2.7 to 6.4) than low-risk patients also after multivariate adjustment (HR 1.6,
95% CI 1 to 2.6 and HR 2.7, 95% CI 1.7 to 4.5, respectively; all p <0.05). In
conclusion, TAVI for intermediate- and low-risk patients is safe and associated
with improved outcome compared with high-risk patients.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2015.09.030 
PMID: 26602076  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Drug Res (Stuttg). 2016 Apr;66(4):223-4. doi: 10.1055/s-0035-1565127. Epub 2015
Nov 17.

The Importance of Evaluating Frailty and Social-behavioral Factors for Managing
Drugs and Dialysis Prescription in Elderly Patients.

Musso CG(1), Vilas M(1), de Quirós FG(2), Núñez JF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Nephrology Division, Hospital Italiano de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires,
Argentina.
(2)Internal Medicine Research Unit, Hospital Italiano de Buenos Aires, Buenos
Aires, Argentina.
(3)Professor of Nephrology and Geriatrics, Department of Medicine, University of 
Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain.

Ageing is characterized by a progressive loss of complexity, which is an
essential condition for making the organism capable of keeping homeostasis. Thus,
senile loss of complexity makes old individuals frail: a syndrome characterized
by the presence of shrinking (sarcopenia), weakness, poor endurance and energy,
slowness, and low physical activity. Moreover, renal ageing progressively leads
to a glomerular filtration rate (GFR) reduction, one of the main pharmacokinetic 
senile changes, which is not detectable by simply evaluating serum urea or
creatinine values but measuring or calculating patient's GFR. Finally, current
epidemiology has documented that detrimental social-behavioral factors such as
low education level, poor financial-resource, depression, and isolation, also
influence the onset and progression of chronic diseases, and even overall
mortality, particularly in the elderly. Thus, we propose that these 3 variables: 
frailty phenotype, senile GFR, and detrimental social-behavioral factors, should 
be considered at time of prescribing drugs or medical procedures in the elderly. 
Additionally, they should also be considered for following patient's response to 
prescribed therapies in elderly patients suffering from chronic diseases
(diabetes mellitus, chronic kidney disease, etc.), or on organ replacement
treatments (dialysis and transplantation).

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0035-1565127 
PMID: 26575015  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2015 Dec 7;10(12):2181-9. doi: 10.2215/CJN.01960215. Epub 
2015 Nov 16.

Frailty and Cognitive Function in Incident Hemodialysis Patients.

McAdams-DeMarco MA(1), Tan J(2), Salter ML(3), Gross A(2), Meoni LA(4), Jaar
BG(5), Kao WH(2), Parekh RS(6), Segev DL(3), Sozio SM(7).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Epidemiology and Departments of Surgery and mara@jhu.edu.
(2)Departments of Epidemiology and.
(3)Departments of Epidemiology and Departments of Surgery and.
(4)Biostatistics, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore,
Maryland; Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland;
(5)Departments of Epidemiology and Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland; Nephrology Center of Maryland, Baltimore,
Maryland;
(6)Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland;
Divisions of Nephrology, Hospital for Sick Children and University Health
Network, Toronto, Canada; and Departments of Pediatrics and Medicine, University 
of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(7)Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland;

Comment in
    Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2015 Dec 7;10(12):2104-6.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Patients of all ages undergoing hemodialysis (HD) have
a high prevalence of cognitive impairment and worse cognitive function than
healthy controls, and those with dementia are at high risk of death. Frailty has 
been associated with poor cognitive function in older adults without kidney
disease. We hypothesized that frailty might also be associated with poor
cognitive function in adults of all ages undergoing HD.
DESIGN, SETTING, PARTICIPANTS, & MEASUREMENTS: At HD initiation, 324 adults
enrolled (November 2008 to July 2012) in a longitudinal cohort study (Predictors 
of Arrhythmic and Cardiovascular Risk in ESRD) were classified into three groups 
(frail, intermediately frail, and nonfrail) based on the Fried frailty phenotype.
Global cognitive function (3MS) and speed/attention (Trail Making Tests A and B
[TMTA and TMTB, respectively]) were assessed at cohort entry and 1-year
follow-up. Associations between frailty and cognitive function (at cohort entry
and 1-year follow-up) were evaluated in adjusted (for sex, age, race, body mass
index, education, depression and comorbidity at baseline) linear (3MS, TMTA) and 
Tobit (TMTB) regression models.
RESULTS: At cohort entry, the mean age was 54.8 years (SD 13.3), 56.5% were men, 
and 72.8% were black. The prevalence of frailty and intermediate frailty were
34.0% and 37.7%, respectively. The mean 3MS was 89.8 (SD 7.6), TMTA was 55.4 (SD 
29), and TMTB was 161 (SD 83). Frailty was independently associated with lower
cognitive function at cohort entry for all three measures (3MS: -2.4 points; 95% 
confidence interval [95% CI], -4.2 to -0.5; P=0.01; TMTA: 12.1 seconds; 95% CI,
4.7 to 19.4; P<0.001; and TMTB: 33.2 seconds; 95% CI, 9.9 to 56.4; P=0.01; all
tests for trend, P<0.001) and with worse 3MS at 1-year follow-up (-2.8 points;
95% CI, -5.4 to -0.2; P=0.03).
CONCLUSIONS: In adult incident HD patients, frailty is associated with worse
cognitive function, particularly global cognitive function (3MS).

Copyright © 2015 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.2215/CJN.01960215 
PMCID: PMC4670760
PMID: 26573615  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Age Ageing. 2016 Jan;45(1):142-8. doi: 10.1093/ageing/afv152. Epub 2015 Nov 11.

Biochemical measures and frailty in people with intellectual disabilities.

Schoufour JD(1), Echteld MA(2), Boonstra A(3), Groothuismink ZM(3), Evenhuis
HM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Practice, Intellectual Disabilities Medicine, Erasmus
University Medical Center, P.O. box 2040, 3000 CA, Rotterdam, The Netherlands
Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Centre, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.
(2)Department of General Practice, Intellectual Disabilities Medicine, Erasmus
University Medical Center, P.O. box 2040, 3000 CA, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Erasmus University Medical
Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Centre, Rotterdam, 
The Netherlands.

INTRODUCTION: People with intellectual disabilities (ID) are earlier frail than
people in the general population. Although this may be explained by lifelong
unfavourable social, psychological and clinical causes, underlying physiological 
pathways might be considered too. Biological measures can help identify
pathophysiological pathways. Therefore, we examined the association between
frailty and a range of serum markers on inflammation, anaemia, the metabolic
system, micronutrients and renal functioning.
METHODS: Participants (n = 757) with borderline to severe ID (50+) were recruited
from three Dutch ID care and support services.
RESULTS: Frailty was measured with a frailty index, a measure based on the
accumulation of deficits. Linear regression analyses were performed to identify
associations between frailty and biochemical measures independent of age, gender,
level of ID and the presence of Down syndrome. Frailty appears associated with
inflammation (IL-6 and CRP), anaemia, metabolic markers (glucose, cholesterol and
albumin) and renal functioning (cystatin-C and creatinine).
DISCUSSION: These results are in line with results observed in the general
population. Future research needs to investigate the causal relation between
biochemical measures and frailty, with a special focus on inflammation and
nutrition. Furthermore, the possibility to screen for frailty using biochemical
measures needs to be used.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the British 
Geriatrics Society. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/ageing/afv152 
PMID: 26563885  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Drugs Aging. 2015 Dec;32(12):999-1008. doi: 10.1007/s40266-015-0318-1.

Age-Related Changes in Hepatic Function: An Update on Implications for Drug
Therapy.

Tan JL(1), Eastment JG(1), Poudel A(2), Hubbard RE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Research in Geriatric Medicine, School of Medicine, The University 
of Queensland, Princess Alexandra Hospital, Woolloongabba, Brisbane, QLD, 4102,
Australia.
(2)School of Pharmacy, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
(3)Centre for Research in Geriatric Medicine, School of Medicine, The University 
of Queensland, Princess Alexandra Hospital, Woolloongabba, Brisbane, QLD, 4102,
Australia. r.hubbard1@uq.edu.au.

The accumulation of deficits with increasing age results in a decline in the
functional capacity of multiple organs and systems. These changes can have a
significant influence on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of prescribed 
drugs. Although alterations in body composition and worsening renal clearance are
important considerations, for most drugs the liver has the greatest effect on
metabolism. Age-related change in hepatic function thereby causes much of the
variability in older people's responses to medication. In this review, we propose
that a decline in the ability of the liver to inactivate toxins may contribute to
a proinflammatory state in which frailty can develop. Since inflammation also
downregulates drug metabolism, medication prescribed to frail older people in
accordance with disease-specific guidelines may undergo reduced systemic
clearance, leading to adverse drug reactions, further functional decline and
increasing polypharmacy, exacerbating rather than ameliorating frailty status. We
also describe how increasing chronological age and frailty status impact liver
size, blood flow and protein binding and enzymes of drug metabolism. This is used
to contextualise our discussion of appropriate prescribing practices. For
example, while the general axiom of 'start low, go slow' should underpin the
initiation of medication (titrating to a defined therapeutic goal), it is
important to consider whether drug clearance is flow or capacity-limited. By
summarising the effect of age-related changes in hepatic function on medications 
commonly used in older people, we aim to provide a guide that will have high
clinical utility for practising geriatricians.

DOI: 10.1007/s40266-015-0318-1 
PMID: 26547855  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


257. BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 2015 Nov 4;15:143. doi: 10.1186/s12872-015-0137-7.

Antithrombotic treatment in elderly patients with atrial fibrillation: a
practical approach.

Suárez Fernández C, Formiga F(3), Camafort M(4), Cepeda Rodrigo M, Díez-Manglano 
J(6), Pose Reino A, Tiberio G(8), Mostaza JM(9); Grupo de trabajo de Riesgo
vascular de la SEMI.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Universitario de La Princesa, Grupo de Riesgo Vascular de la SEMI,
Madrid, España. csuarezf@salud.madrid.org.
(2)Servicio de Medicina Interna, Hospital Universitario de La Princesa, C/Diego
de León 62, 28006, Madrid, Spain. csuarezf@salud.madrid.org.
(3)Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge, Grupo de Riesgo Vascular de la SEMI,
Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, España.
(4)Atrial Fibrillation Unit (UFA), Internal Medicine Department, Hospital Clinic.
University of Barcelona. Research Group in Cardiovascular Risk, Nutrition and
Aging. Area. 'August Pi i Sunyer' Biomedical Research Institute (IDIBAPS),
Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Hospital Vega Baja de Orihuela, Grupo de Riesgo Vascular de la SEMI, Orihuela,
Alicante, España.
(6)Hospital Royo Villanova, Grupo de Riesgo Vascular de la SEMI, Zaragoza,
España.
(7)Complexo Hospitalario Universitario de Santiago, Grupo de Riesgo Vascular de
la SEMI, Santiago de Compostela, España.
(8)Hospital Virgen del Camino, Grupo de Riesgo Vascular de la SEMI, Pamplona,
España.
(9)Hospital Carlos III, Grupo de Riesgo Vascular de la SEMI, Madrid, España.

Erratum in
    BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 2015;15:157. Fernández, Suárez [corrected to Suárez
Fernández, Carmen]; Rodrigo, Jose Cepeda [corrected to Cepeda Rodrigo, Jose
María]; Reino, Pose [corrected to Pose Reino, Antonio].

BACKGROUND: Atrial fibrillation (AF) in the elderly is a complex condition. It
has a direct impact on the underuse of antithrombotic therapy reported in this
population.
DISCUSSION: All patients aged ≥75 years with AF have an individual yearly risk of
stroke >4 %. However, the risk of hemorrhage is also increased. Moreover, in this
population it is common the presence of other comorbidities, cognitive disorders,
risk of falls and polymedication. This may lead to an underuse of anticoagulant
therapy. Direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs) are at least as effective as
conventional therapy, but with lesser risk of intracranial hemorrhage. The
simplification of treatment with these drugs may be an advantage in patients with
cognitive impairment. The great majority of elderly patients with AF should
receive anticoagulant therapy, unless an unequivocal contraindication. DOACs may 
be the drugs of choice in many elderly patients with AF. In this manuscript, the 
available evidence about the management of anticoagulation in elderly patients
with AF is reviewed. In addition, specific practical recommendations about
different controversial issues (i.e. patients with anemia, thrombocytopenia, risk
of gastrointestinal bleeding, renal dysfunction, cognitive impairment, risk of
falls, polymedication, frailty, etc.) are provided.

DOI: 10.1186/s12872-015-0137-7 
PMCID: PMC4632329
PMID: 26530138  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


258. PeerJ. 2015 Oct 22;3:e1354. doi: 10.7717/peerj.1354. eCollection 2015.

Frailty severity is significantly associated with electrocardiographic QRS
duration in chronic dialysis patients.

Chao CT(1), Huang JW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital Jin-shan Branch , 
New Taipei City , Taiwan ; Graduate Institute of Toxicology, National Taiwan
University , Taipei , Taiwan.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital , Taipei 
, Taiwan.

End-stage renal disease (ESRD) patients are at increased risk of sudden cardiac
death, the risk of which is presumably related to arrhythmia.
Electrocardiographic (ECG) parameters have been found to correlate with
arrhythmia and predict cardiovascular outcomes in ESRD patients. Frailty is also 
a common feature in this population. We investigate whether the severity of
dialysis frailty is associated with ECG findings, including PR interval, QRS
duration, and QTc interval. Presence and severity of frailty was ascertained
using six different self-report questionnaires with proven construct validity.
Correlation analysis between frailty severity and ECG was made, and those with
significant association entered into multiple regression analysis for
confirmation. Among a cohort of chronic hemodialysis patients, we found that
frailty severity, assessed by the Edmonton frailty scale, is significantly
associated with QRS duration (r = - 0.3, p < 0.05). Dialysis patients with QRS
longer than 120 ms had significantly lower severity of frailty than those with
QRS less than 120 ms (p = 0.01 for the Edmonton frailty scale and 0.05 for simple
FRAIL scale). Regression analysis showed that frailty severity, assessed by the
Edmonton frailty scale and simple FRAIL scale, was significantly associated with 
QRS duration independent of serum electrolyte levels. In conclusion, a
significant relationship exists between the severity of frailty and QRS duration 
in ESRD patients. This might be an under-recognized link between frailty and its 
adverse cardiovascular impact in these patients.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.1354 
PMCID: PMC4627921
PMID: 26528415 


259. Transplantation. 2016 Feb;100(2):429-36. doi: 10.1097/TP.0000000000000991.

The Prevalence and Prognostic Significance of Frailty in Patients With Advanced
Heart Failure Referred for Heart Transplantation.

Jha SR(1), Hannu MK, Chang S, Montgomery E, Harkess M, Wilhelm K, Hayward CS,
Jabbour A, Spratt PM, Newton P, Davidson PM, Macdonald PS.

Author information: 
(1)1 Heart Transplant Program, St Vincent's Hospital, Sydney, NSW, Australia. 2
Centre for Cardiovascular and Chronic Care, Faculty Health, University of
Technology Sydney, Sydney, Australia. 3 Department of Occupational Therapy, St
Vincent's Hospital, Sydney, NSW, Australia. 4 Consultation Liaison Psychiatry, St
Vincent's Hospital, Sydney, NSW, Australia. 5 Faculty of Medicine, University of 
New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia. 6 Victor Chang Cardiac Research
Institute, Sydney, NSW, Australia. 7 Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, St
Vincent's Hospital, Sydney, NSW, Australia. 8 Faculty of Nursing, John Hopkins
University, Baltimore, MD.

Comment in
    Transplantation. 2016 Feb;100(2):266-7.

BACKGROUND: Frailty is a clinically recognized syndrome of decreased
physiological reserve. The heightened state of vulnerability in these patients
confers a greater risk of adverse outcomes after even minor stressors. Our aim
was to assess the prevalence and prognostic significance of the frailty phenotype
in patients referred for heart transplantation.
METHODS: Consecutive patients referred or on the waiting list for heart
transplantation from March 2013 underwent frailty assessment. Frailty was defined
as a positive response to 3 or more of the following 5 components: weak grip
strength, slowed walking speed, poor appetite, physical inactivity, and
exhaustion. In addition, markers of disease severity were obtained, and all
patients underwent cognitive (Montreal Cognitive Assessment) and depression
(Depression in Medical Illness-10) screening.
RESULTS: One hundred twenty patients (83 men:37 women; age, 53 ± 12 years, range,
16-73 years; left ventricular ejection fraction, 27 ± 14%) underwent frailty
assessment. Thirty-nine of 120 patients (33%) were assessed as frail. Frailty was
associated with New York Heart Association class IV heart failure, lower body
mass index, elevated intracardiac filling pressures, lower cardiac index, anemia,
hypoalbuminemia, hyperbilirubinemia, cognitive impairment, and depression (all ρ 
< 0.05). Frailty was independent of age, sex, heart failure duration, left
ventricular ejection fraction, or renal function. Frailty was an independent
predictor of increased all-cause mortality: 1 year actuarial survival was 79 ± 5%
in the nonfrail group compared with only 54 ± 9% for the frail group (P < 0.005).
CONCLUSIONS: Frailty is prevalent among patients with advanced symptomatic heart 
failure referred for heart transplantation and is associated with increased
mortality.

DOI: 10.1097/TP.0000000000000991 
PMID: 26516676  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Can J Cardiol. 2015 Dec;31(12):1462-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cjca.2015.07.737. Epub 2015
Aug 21.

Usefulness of Clinical Data and Biomarkers for the Identification of Frailty
After Acute Coronary Syndromes.

Sanchis J(1), Núñez E(2), Ruiz V(3), Bonanad C(2), Fernández J(3), Cauli O(3),
García-Blas S(2), Mainar L(2), Valero E(2), Rodríguez-Borja E(4), Chorro FJ(2),
Hermenegildo C(5), Núñez J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Hospital Clínico Universitario, Valencia, School of 
Medicine, University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain. Electronic address:
sanchis_juafor@gva.es.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Hospital Clínico Universitario, Valencia, School of 
Medicine, University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain.
(3)Nursing School, University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain.
(4)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Hospital Clínico Universitario, Valencia,
Spain.
(5)Department of Physiology, University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain.

Comment in
    Can J Cardiol. 2016 Oct;32(10 ):1261.e15.
    Can J Cardiol. 2016 Oct;32(10 ):1261.e17.

BACKGROUND: Frailty predicts mortality after acute coronary syndrome (ACS). The
standard frailty scales, such as the Fried score, consist of a variety of
questionnaires and physical tests. Our aim was to investigate easily available
clinical data and blood markers to predict frailty at discharge, in elderly
patients after ACS.
METHODS: A total of 342 patients older than 65 years, survivors after ACS, were
included. A high number of clinical variables were collected. In addition, blood 
markers potentially linked to frailty and related to the processes of
inflammation, coagulation, hormonal dysregulation, nutrition, renal dysfunction, 
and heart dysfunction were determined. Frailty was evaluated using the Fried
score at discharge. The main outcome was frailty defined by a Fried score ≥ 3
points. Secondary endpoints were mortality and myocardial infarction at 30-month 
median follow-up.
RESULTS: A total of 116 patients were frail. Seven clinical variables or
biomarkers predicted frailty: age ≥ 75 years, female, prior ischemic heart
disease, admission heart failure, haemoglobin ≤ 12.5 g/dL, vitamin D ≤ 9 ng/mL,
and cystatin-C ≥ 1.2 mg/L. This model based on clinical data and biomarkers
showed an excellent discrimination accuracy for frailty (C-statistic = 0.818).
During the follow-up, 105 patients died and 137 died or suffered myocardial
infarction. The clinical data and biomarker model (C-statistics = 0.730 and
0.691) performed better than the Fried score (C-statistics = 0.676 and 0.650) for
death and death or myocardial infarction, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Easy available clinical data and biomarkers can identify frail
patients at discharge after ACS and predict outcomes better than the standard
Fried's frailty scale.

Copyright © 2015 Canadian Cardiovascular Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cjca.2015.07.737 
PMID: 26514748  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


261. J Ren Nutr. 2016 Jan;26(1):45-52. doi: 10.1053/j.jrn.2015.08.007. Epub 2015 Oct
21.

The "Dose-Effect" Relationship Between 25-Hydroxyvitamin D and Muscle Strength in
Hemodialysis Patients Favors a Normal Threshold of 30 ng/mL for Plasma
25-Hydroxyvitamin D.

Bataille S(1), Landrier JF(2), Astier J(2), Giaime P(3), Sampol J(3), Sichez
H(3), Ollier J(3), Gugliotta J(3), Serveaux M(3), Cohen J(4), Darmon P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Phocean Nephrology Institute, Clinique Bouchard, Marseille, France; Nephrology
Dialysis Renal Transplantation Center, APHM, CHU Conception, Marseille, France.
Electronic address: stanislas.bataille@ap-hm.fr.
(2)Institut National de Recherche Agronomique, Unité Mixte de Recherche 1260,
Marseille, France; Inserm, Unité Mixte de Recherche 1062, Nutrition, Obésité et
Risque Thrombotique, Marseille, France; Faculté de Médecine, Aix-Marseille
Université, Marseille, France.
(3)Phocean Nephrology Institute, Clinique Bouchard, Marseille, France.
(4)Medistats, Marseille, France.

OBJECTIVE: Muscle strength is weakened in maintenance hemodialysis patients.
Strength is both a measure of a functional parameter and of frailty as it is
independently associated with mortality. In the general population, observational
studies show that plasma 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25[OH]D) is positively correlated
with muscle strength and function. We analyzed the determinants of muscle
strength measured by handgrip and 25(OH)D in a maintenance hemodialysis
population.
METHODS: In this observational cross-sectional study, data from all hemodialysis 
patients from our nephrology department were recorded in July 2014. Daily
nutritional oral intake, handgrip strength, body composition measured by
bioimpedancemetry analysis, as well as biological and dialysis parameters, were
obtained from medical files. We used a linear regression model to assess
nutritional, biological, and dialysis parameters as well as body composition
associated with handgrip strength.
RESULTS: The median age (interquartile range) of the 130 included patients was
77.3 (69.5-84.7) years, 57.7% were men, and 50.8% had diabetes mellitus. Median
handgrip strength value (interquartile range) was 14.3 (10.6-22.2) kg. In
univariate analyses, the factors associated with handgrip strength were age,
gender, albumin, transthyretin, predialysis creatinine and urea, normalized
protein nitrogen appearance, lean mass, and muscle mass measured by
bioimpedancemetry analysis as well as phase angle, and 25(OH)D. In multivariate
analyses, lower age, male gender, higher albumin, higher muscle mass, and 25(OH)D
level ≥ 30 ng/mL were independently correlated with muscle strength measured by
handgrip.
CONCLUSIONS: This study found a positive correlation between plasma 25(OH)D and
muscle strength measured by handgrip in hemodialysis patients. We report a
"dose-effect" relationship between 25(OH)D and handgrip strength under 30 ng/mL, 
which is no more present above 30 ng/mL. Prospective randomized studies are
needed to prove that supplementation with cholecalciferol, leading to 25(OH)D
levels ≥ 30 ng/mL, improves muscle strength in hemodialysis patients.

Copyright © 2016 National Kidney Foundation, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.jrn.2015.08.007 
PMID: 26500077  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens. 2015 Nov;24(6):498-504. doi:
10.1097/MNH.0000000000000163.

The assessment of frailty in older people with chronic kidney disease.

Bohm C(1), Storsley L, Tangri N.

Author information: 
(1)University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Frailty is common in chronic kidney disease (CKD) and is a
predictor of adverse outcomes. The current article reviews the most common
frailty measures available, gives an overview of their use in the chronic kidney 
disease population, and summarizes their strengths and limitations.
RECENT FINDINGS: Frailty is increasingly recognized as a potent predictor of
adverse outcomes in all stages of chronic kidney disease. Recent investigations
have demonstrated that the clinical perception of frailty by healthcare personnel
or patients themselves is an inaccurate measure of frailty. The clinical frailty 
scale, a simple point-of-care tool for the assessment of frailty, has been shown 
to be a predictor of mortality in individuals on dialysis.
SUMMARY: The Fried criteria have been most extensively used in chronic kidney
disease. However, other criteria using self-reported outcomes, clinical and
cognitive criteria have also been shown to predict adverse outcomes and may be
more applicable in clinical settings. Many of these still require further
validation in the chronic kidney disease population.

DOI: 10.1097/MNH.0000000000000163 
PMID: 26447796  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Int Urol Nephrol. 2015 Nov;47(11):1801-7. doi: 10.1007/s11255-015-1112-z. Epub
2015 Sep 28.

Frailty phenotype and chronic kidney disease: a review of the literature.

Musso CG(1), Jauregui JR(2), Macías Núñez JF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Ageing Biology Unit, Hospital Italiano de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires,
Argentina. carlos.musso@hospitalitaliano.org.ar.
(2)Ageing Biology Unit, Hospital Italiano de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires,
Argentina.
(3)Nephrology Division, Hospital Universitario de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain.

Frailty is a construct originally coined by gerontologists to describe cumulative
declines across multiple physiological systems that occur with aging and lead
individuals to a state of diminished physiological reserve and increased
vulnerability to stressors. Fried et al. provided a standardized definition for
frailty, and they created the concept of frailty phenotype which incorporates
disturbances across interrelated domains (shrinking, weakness, poor endurance and
energy, slowness, and low physical activity level) to indentify old people who
are at risk of disability, falls, institutionalization, hospitalization, and
premature death. Some authors consider the presence of lean mass reduction
(sarcopenia) as part of the frailty phenotype. The frailty status has been
documented in 7 % of elderly population and 14 % of not requiring dialysis CKD
adult patients. Sarcopenia increases progressively along with loss of renal
function in CKD patients and is high in dialysis population. It has been
documented that prevalence of frailty in hemodialysis adult patients is around 42
% (35 % in young and 50 % in elderly), having a 2.60-fold higher risk of
mortality and 1.43-fold higher number of hospitalization, independent of age,
comorbidity, and disability. The Clinical Frailty Scale is the simplest and
clinically useful and validated tool for doing a frailty phenotype, while the
diagnosis of sarcopenia is based on muscle mass assessment by body imaging
techniques, bioimpedance analysis, and muscle strength evaluated with a handheld 
dynamometer. Frailty treatment can be based on different strategies, such as
exercise, nutritional interventions, drugs, vitamins, and antioxidant agents.
Finally, palliative care is a very important alternative for very frail and sick 
patients. In conclusion, since the diagnosis and treatment of frailty and
sarcopenia is crucial in geriatrics and all CKD patients, it would be very
important to incorporate these evaluations in pre-dialysis, peritoneal dialysis, 
hemodialysis, and kidney transplant patients in order to detect and consequently 
treat the frailty phenotype in these groups.

DOI: 10.1007/s11255-015-1112-z 
PMID: 26411428  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


264. BMC Nephrol. 2015 Sep 23;16:157. doi: 10.1186/s12882-015-0150-1.

Association of frailty with endothelial dysfunction and its possible impact on
negative outcomes in Brazilian predialysis patients with chronic kidney disease.

Mansur HN(1)(2), Lovisi JC(3), Colugnati FA(3), Raposo NR(3), Fernandes NM(3),
Bastos MG(4).

Author information: 
(1)IMEPEN Foundation, Federal University of Juiz de Fora, Juiz de Fora, Brazil.
hnmansur@gmail.com.
(2)Academic Centre of Vitoria, Federal University of Pernambuco, Vitória de Santo
Antão, Pernambuco, Brazil. hnmansur@gmail.com.
(3)IMEPEN Foundation, Federal University of Juiz de Fora, Juiz de Fora, Brazil.
(4)Federal University of Juiz de Fora, José Lourenço Kelmer Street, 1300, Juiz de
Fora, Minas Gerais, Brazil. marcusbastos7@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Frailty is a state of physiological vulnerability common in the
elderly. It is more predominant in patients with Chronic Kidney Disease in
comparison to healthy subjects, which can also be diagnosed in non-elderly
individuals and be associated with innumerous causes such as muscle strength,
body composition and inflammation. The association between frailty and
endothelial function, as well as the association between frailty and the combined
outcome of mortality multiple cause and start of renal replace therapy were
assessed.
METHODS: In the initial analysis, sixty-one predialysis patients with Chronic
Kidney Disease stages were evaluated and included in this study. Due to patient
drop-out during follow-up, fifty-seven patients were subsequently re-evaluated 12
months later. The diagnosis of frailty was based on the Johansen et al. (J Am Soc
Nephrol 18(11):2960-67, 2007) criteria. The groups were divided into Non-frail
and Frail. Sociodemographic, inflammatory markers (IL-6, TNF-?, CRP-us),
endothelial dysfunction (flow-mediated vasodilatation - FMD), body composition
(DXA) and the 25-hidroxi-vitamin D parameters were analyzed.
RESULTS: The average age of the patients used in the study was 64.9 ± 10.3 years 
old. The predominance of frailty was 42.6%, of which 46% were non-elderly. After 
some adjustments, frailty was associated with gender (OR = 11.32; IC 95% = 2.30
to 55.67), advanced age (OR = 4.07; IC 95% = 1.02 to 16.20), obesity (OR = 6.63; 
IC 95% = 0.82 to 11.44) and endothelial dysfunction (OR = 3.86; IC 95% = 1.00 to 
14.88). The ratio of the incidence of frail subjects to the variable outcome was 
2.5 (CI 95%, 1.04 to 6.50).
CONCLUSIONS: Although an observational study does not allow one to determine the 
casual relation between frailty and endothelial dysfunction, we conclude that
frailty was predominant in our sample of Brazilian patients with chronic kidney
disease on predialysis, even in elderly individuals. This was linked to either
worse endothelial function or mortality.

DOI: 10.1186/s12882-015-0150-1 
PMCID: PMC4579818
PMID: 26395776  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


265. BMJ Support Palliat Care. 2015 Sep 21. pii: bmjspcare-2015-000864. doi:
10.1136/bmjspcare-2015-000864. [Epub ahead of print]

A prospective observational study of prevalence and outcomes of patients with
Gold Standard Framework criteria in a tertiary regional Australian Hospital.

Milnes S(1), Orford NR(2), Berkeley L(3), Lambert N(4), Simpson N(3), Elderkin
T(3), Corke C(1), Bailey M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Intensive Care Unit, University Hospital Geelong, Barwon Health, Geelong,
Victoria, Australia Department of Medicine, Deakin University School of Medicine,
Barwon Health, Geelong, Victoria, Australia.
(2)Intensive Care Unit, University Hospital Geelong, Barwon Health, Geelong,
Victoria, Australia Department of Medicine, Deakin University School of Medicine,
Barwon Health, Geelong, Victoria, Australia Department of Epidemiology and
Preventive Medicine (DEPM), Australian and New Zealand Intensive Care Research
Centre (ANZIC-RC), Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(3)Intensive Care Unit, University Hospital Geelong, Barwon Health, Geelong,
Victoria, Australia.
(4)Intensive Care Unit, University Hospital Geelong, Barwon Health, Geelong,
Victoria, Australia Southern GP Training (SGPT), Drysdale Clinic, Geelong,
Victoria, Australia.
(5)Department of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine (DEPM), Australian and New 
Zealand Intensive Care Research Centre (ANZIC-RC), Monash University, Melbourne, 
Victoria, Australia.

OBJECTIVES: Report the use of an objective tool, UK Gold Standards Framework
(GSF) criteria, to describe the prevalence, recognition and outcomes of patients 
with palliative care needs in an Australian acute health setting. The rationale
for this is to enable hospital doctors to identify patients who should have a
patient-centred discussion about goals of care in hospital.
DESIGN: Prospective, observational, cohort study.
PARTICIPANTS: Adult in-patients during two separate 24 h periods.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Prevalence of in-patients with GSF criteria, documentation
of treatment limitations, hospital and 1 year survival, admission and discharge
destination and multivariate regression analysis of factors associated with the
presence of hospital treatment limitations and 1 year survival.
RESULTS: Of 626 in-patients reviewed, 171 (27.3%) had at least one GSF criterion,
with documentation of a treatment limitation discussion in 60 (30.5%) of those
patients who had GSF criteria. Hospital mortality was 9.9%, 1 year mortality
50.3% and 3-year mortality 70.2% in patients with GSF criteria. One-year
mortality was highest in patients with GSF cancer (73%), renal failure (67%) and 
heart failure (60%) criteria. Multivariate analysis revealed age, hospital length
of stay and presence of the GSF chronic obstructive pulmonary disease criteria
were independently associated with the likelihood of an in-hospital treatment
limitation. Non-survivors at 3 years were more likely to have a GSF cancer (25%
vs 6%, p=0.004), neurological (10% vs 3%, p=0.04), or frailty (45% vs 3%, p=0.04)
criteria. After multivariate logistic regression GSF cancer criteria, renal
failure criteria and the presence of two or more GSF clinical criteria were
independently associated with increased risk of death at 3 years. Patients
returning home to live reduced from 69% (preadmission) to 27% after discharge.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of an objective clinical tool identifies a high prevalence
of patients with palliative care needs in the acute tertiary Australian hospital 
setting, with a high 1 year mortality and poor return to independence in this
population. The low rate of documentation of discussions about treatment
limitations in this population suggests palliative care needs are not recognised 
and discussed in the majority of patients.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: 11/121.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjspcare-2015-000864 
PMID: 26391750 


266. Am J Nephrol. 2015;42(2):134-40. doi: 10.1159/000439000. Epub 2015 Sep 19.

Association of Self-Reported Frailty with Falls and Fractures among Patients New 
to Dialysis.

Delgado C(1), Shieh S, Grimes B, Chertow GM, Dalrymple LS, Kaysen GA, Kornak J,
Johansen KL.

Author information: 
(1)Nephrology Section, San Francisco VA Medical Center, and Division of
Nephrology, University of California, San Francisco, Calif., USA.

BACKGROUND: Although frailty has been linked to higher risk of falls and fracture
in the general population, only few studies have examined the extent to which
frailty is associated with these outcomes among patients with end-stage renal
disease, who are at particularly high risk for these events.
METHODS: A total of 1,646 patients who were beginning maintenance hemodialysis in
297 dialysis units throughout the United States from September 2005 to June 2007 
were enrolled in the Comprehensive Dialysis Study, and 1,053 Medicare
beneficiaries were included in this study. Self-reported frailty was defined by
the patients endorsing 2 or more of the following: poor physical functioning,
exhaustion or low physical activity. Falls and fractures requiring medical
attention were identified through Medicare claims data. We examined the
association between frailty and the time to first fall or fracture using the
Fine-Gray modification of Cox proportional hazards regression, adjusted for
demographics, Quételet's body mass index, diabetes mellitus, heart failure and
atherosclerosis.
RESULTS: Seventy-seven percent of patients were frail by self-report. The median 
length of follow-up was 2.5 (1.0-3.9) years. Crude rates of first medically
urgent falls or fractures were 66 and 126 per 1,000 person-years in non-frail and
self-reported frail participants, respectively. After accounting for demographic 
factors, comorbidities and the competing risk of death, self-reported frailty was
associated with a higher risk of falls or fractures requiring medical attention
(hazards ratio 1.60, 95% CI 1.16-2.20).
CONCLUSION: Participants reporting frailty experienced nearly twice the risk of
medically urgent falls or fractures compared to those who did not report frailty.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000439000 
PMCID: PMC4596065
PMID: 26381744  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Int Urol Nephrol. 2015 Nov;47(11):1809-16. doi: 10.1007/s11255-015-1107-9. Epub
2015 Sep 16.

Pro and con arguments in using alternative dialysis regimens in the frail and
elderly patients.

Chazot C(1), Farrington K(2)(3), Nistor I(4)(5), Van Biesen W(4)(6), Joosten
H(7), Teta D(8), Siriopol D(5), Covic A(9).

Author information: 
(1)NephroCare Tassin-Charcot, Sainte Foy Les Lyon, France.
(2)Renal Unit, Lister Hospital, Stevenage, Hertfordshire, UK.
(3)Postgraduate Medical School, University of Hertfordshire, Hatfield,
Hertfordshire, UK.
(4)ERBP, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(5)Nephrology Department, Gr. T. Popa University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, 
Romania.
(6)Renal Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Ghent University Hospital,
Ghent, Belgium.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, UMCG, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(8)Service of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, University Hospital Lausanne,
Lausanne, Switzerland.
(9)Nephrology Department, Gr. T. Popa University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, 
Romania. accovic@gmail.com.

In the last decade, an increasing number of patients over 75 years of age are
starting renal replacement therapy. Frailty is highly prevalent in elderly
patients with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) in the context of the increased
prevalence of some ESRD-associated conditions: protein-energy wasting,
inflammation, anaemia, acidosis or hormonal disturbances. There are currently no 
hard data to support guidance on the optimal duration of dialysis for
frail/elderly ESRD patients. The current debate is not about starting dialysis or
managing conservatory frail ESRD patients, but whether a more intensive regimen
once dialysis is initiated (for whatever reasons and circumstances) would improve
patients' outcome. The most important issue is that all studies performed with
extended/alternative dialysis regimens do not specifically address this
particular type of patients and therefore all the inferences are derived from the
general ESRD population. Care planning should be responsive to end-of-life needs 
whatever the treatment modality. Care in this setting should focus on symptom
control and quality of life rather than life extension. We conclude that, similar
to the general dialysed population, extensive application of more intensive
dialysis schedules is not based on solid evidence. However, after a thorough
clinical evaluation, a limited period of a trial of intensive dialysis could be
prescribed in more problematic patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s11255-015-1107-9 
PMID: 26377489  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Geriatr Psychol Neuropsychiatr Vieil. 2015 Mar;13 Suppl 1:23-8. doi:
10.1684/pnv.2015.0542.

[Anaemia and chronic diseases].

[Article in French]

Chassagne P(1), Amalou L(1), Thillard AL(1), Gbaguidi X(1), Roca F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Service de médecine interne gériatrique, CHU Rouen, France.

The prevalence of anemia in old patients is 20%. Anemia is mostly multifactorial 
associated with multiple comorbidities that are frequently observed in people of 
65 years or older. Chronic renal failure, inflammatory diseases, nutrient
deficiencies and especially iron deficiency are the most associated conditions
with anemia. Anemia represents a prognosis marker of general health in old
people. Thus anemia is associated with higher rates of morbidities (such as
unplanned hospitalizations) and greatest mortality. Therefore anemia could be
considered either as a consequence of chronic diseases or a prognosis marker of
their severity. The prognosis of chronic cardiac failure is for example worst in 
anemic patients. Finally anemia is listed as a component of the frailty.

DOI: 10.1684/pnv.2015.0542 
PMID: 26345584  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Am J Cardiol. 2015 Nov 1;116(9):1391-8. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2015.08.004. Epub 
2015 Aug 14.

Long-Term Outcomes for Patients With Severe Symptomatic Aortic Stenosis Treated
With Transcatheter Aortic Valve Implantation.

Codner P(1), Orvin K(1), Assali A(1), Sharony R(2), Vaknin-Assa H(1), Shapira
Y(1), Schwartzenberg S(1), Bental T(1), Sagie A(1), Kornowski R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Department, Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikwa, Israel; "Sackler"
School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(2)"Sackler" School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel;
Cardiothoracic Surgery Department, Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikwa, Israel.
(3)Cardiology Department, Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikwa, Israel; "Sackler"
School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel. Electronic address:
ran.kornowski@gmail.com.

Transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI) is an established technique for
the treatment of severe symptomatic aortic stenosis. Data on long-term TAVI
outcomes, both hemodynamic and clinical, in real-world practice settings are
limited. We aim to explore the long-term clinical results in patients with severe
symptomatic aortic stenosis using multiple catheter-based options: 360
TAVI-treated patients were followed up for ≤5 years. The Medtronic CoreValve was 
used in 71% and the Edwards SAPIEN in 26%. The primary end point was all-cause
mortality during follow-up. Outcomes were assessed based on the Valve Academic
Research Consortium 2 criteria. The mean ± SD patient age was 82.1 ± 6.9 years
(56.4% women). The Society of Thoracic Surgeons score was 7.5 ± 4.7. The clinical
efficacy end point and time-related valve safety at 3 years was 50% and 81.7%,
respectively. The calculated 3- and 5-year survival rates were 71.6% and 56.4%,
respectively. Five-year follow-up data were obtained for 54 patients alive; 96.2%
of alive patients were in the New York Heart Association class I and II, 4 years 
after TAVI. No gender differences in all-cause mortality rates were observed (p =
0.58). In multivariate analysis, hospitalization 6 months previous to TAVI
(hazard ratio [HR] 1.92, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.17 to 3.15, p = 0.01),
frailty (HR 1.89, 95% CI 1.11 to 3.2, p = 0.02), acute kidney injury (HR 1.93,
95% CI 1.03 to 3.61, p = 0.04), and moderate or more paravalvular aortic
regurgitation after TAVI (HR 4.26, 95% CI 2.54 to 7.15, p <0.001) were
independent predictors for all-cause mortality. In conclusion, long-term outcomes
of TAVI are encouraging. Prevention and early identification of paravalvular leak
and acute renal failure after the procedure would improve short- and long-term
outcomes.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2015.08.004 
PMID: 26342515  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Ren Fail. 2015;37(9):1419-24. doi: 10.3109/0886022X.2015.1077315. Epub 2015 Sep
3.

Groningen frailty indicator in older patients with end-stage renal disease.

Meulendijks FG(1), Hamaker ME(2), Boereboom FT(1), Kalf A(3), Vögtlander NP(4),
van Munster BC(3)(5).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Internal Medicine , Diakonessenhuis Utrecht , The Netherlands 
.
(2)b Department of Geriatric Medicine , Diakonessenhuis Utrecht , The Netherlands
.
(3)c Department of Geriatric Medicine , Gelre Hospitals , Apeldoorn , The
Netherlands .
(4)d Department of Internal Medicine , Gelre Hospitals , Apeldoorn , The
Netherlands , and.
(5)e Department of Medicine , Academic Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam , 
Amsterdam , The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Currently over 55% of end-stage renal disease (ESRD) patients are
aged ≥60 years and patients >75 years represent the fastest growing segment of
the dialysis population. We aimed to assess whether the Groningen frailty
indicator (GFI) can be used to distinguish fit older ESRD patients, likely able
to tolerate and benefit from dialysis, from frail older patients who need further
evaluation with a geriatrician's comprehensive assessment.
METHODS: All patients aged ≥65 years visiting the pre-dialysis unit at the Gelre 
hospital between 2007 and 2013 were included and underwent the GFI (n = 65).
Patients with GFI ≥ 4 (frail) were referred for geriatric consultation (n = 13). 
Results of the GFI and nephrologists' evaluation were compared with
geriatrician's assessment. Survival rates and outcomes after one year of follow
up were recorded.
RESULTS: Twenty patients (32%) were identified as frail. Of the problems
identified by the geriatrician in 13 patients, 55% were not reported in the
nephrologists' notes. The first year after inclusion, 30% of patients with a
GFI ≥ 4 died, compared to 9% of fit patients (p = 0.04). Moreover, 90% of frail
patients had been hospitalized one or more times, compared to 53% in the fit
group (p = 0.005).
CONCLUSION: Although the GFI can be a useful instrument to identify ESRD patients
at risk, both the GFI and the nephrologists' assessment failed to identify
specific geriatric impairments. Further research is needed to develop a specific 
frailty indicator for ESRD patients and to determine the value and effect of a
comprehensive geriatric assessment in ESRD patients.

DOI: 10.3109/0886022X.2015.1077315 
PMID: 26337636  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Australas J Ageing. 2015 Sep;34(3):E9-12. doi: 10.1111/ajag.12231.

Feasibility and construct validity of a Frailty index for patients with chronic
kidney disease.

Hubbard RE(1), Peel NM(1), Smith M(2)(3), Dawson B(3), Lambat Z(3), Bak M(3),
Best J(4), Johnson DW(4).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Research in Geriatric Medicine, The University of Queensland,
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
(2)Ochsner Medical School, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA.
(3)School of Medicine, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland,
Australia.
(4)Department of Nephrology, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, 
Australia.

AIM: To determine whether the frailty status of patients with chronic kidney
disease (CKD) can be measured using a Frailty index (FI).
METHODS: One hundred and eleven attending a nephrology clinic were approached to 
complete a one-page questionnaire evaluating cognitive, psychological and
functional status. Data were coded as deficits, summed and divided by the total
number of deficits considered, to derive an FI-CKD.
RESULTS: One hundred and ten (mean age 65.2 years) agreed to participate and
assessments took approximately 10 minutes to complete. Mean FI-CKD was 0.25 (SD
0.12). The FI-CKD increased with age at 3% per year, correlated with a modified
Fried phenotype (P < 0.001) and increased significantly across CKD stages (P =
0.04).
CONCLUSIONS: The FI-CKD is feasible in the outpatient setting and has good
construct validity. The greater granularity of a continuous measure has the
potential to inform decision-making regarding appropriate interventions for
patients at the 'frail' end of the health spectrum.

© 2015 AJA Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/ajag.12231 
PMID: 26337415  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Can J Cardiol. 2016 Feb;32(2):169-76. doi: 10.1016/j.cjca.2015.05.012. Epub 2015 
May 27.

The Effect of Bleeding Risk and Frailty Status on Anticoagulation Patterns in
Octogenarians With Atrial Fibrillation: The FRAIL-AF Study.

Lefebvre MC(1), St-Onge M(1), Glazer-Cavanagh M(1), Bell L(1), Kha Nguyen JN(1), 
Viet-Quoc Nguyen P(2), Tannenbaum C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada;
Faculty of Pharmacy, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada.
(2)Centre hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada;
Faculty of Pharmacy, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada; Centre de 
recherche du Centre hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec,
Canada.
(3)Faculty of Pharmacy, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada; Faculty
of Medicine, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada; Institut
universitaire de gériatrie de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada; Centre de
recherche de l'Institut universitaire de gériatrie de Montréal, Montréal, Québec,
Canada. Electronic address: cara.tannenbaum@umontreal.ca.

Comment in
    Can J Cardiol. 2016 Feb;32(2):270.e11.
    Can J Cardiol. 2016 Feb;32(2):139-41.
    Can J Cardiol. 2016 Feb;32(2):270.e9.

BACKGROUND: Older adults are at increased risk of atrial fibrillation (AF), its
thromboembolic complications, and bleeding. A significant percentage of
octogenarians do not receive anticoagulation therapy. The objective of this study
was to investigate the effect of thromboembolic risk, bleeding risk, and frailty 
on the anticoagulation status of octogenarians hospitalized with AF.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study was conducted in 682 hospitalized patients aged 
80 years and older with AF or atrial flutter in Montreal, Québec. Consumption of 
warfarin or a new oral anticoagulant was documented. Medical record data were
used to determine each patient's frailty status using the Clinical Frailty Scale 
(CFS) and to evaluate the risk of stroke (CHADS2 [Congestive Heart Failure,
Hypertension, Age, Diabetes, Stroke/Transient Ischemic Attack]) and bleeding
(HAS-BLED [Hypertension, Abnormal renal/liver function, Stroke, Bleeding history 
or predisposition, Labile international normalized ratio, Elderly (> 65 years)
Drugs/alcohol concomitantly]). Univariable and multivariable logistic regression 
analyses were used to examine the effect of frailty status and the risk of stroke
and bleeding on the probability of receiving anticoagulation therapy.
RESULTS: Seventy percent of octogenarians with AF received anticoagulation
therapy (n = 475). A high risk of stroke (CHADS2 = 3 compared with CHADS2 = 1,
odds ratio [OR], 3.58; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.09-11.77), and the absence
of severe frailty (CFS < 7; OR, 3.41; 95% CI, 1.84-6.33) were independently
associated with anticoagulant use in multivariable analyses. A high risk of
bleeding (HAS-BLED score ≥ 3; OR, 0.33; 95% CI, 0.12-0.86) was associated with
the absence of anticoagulation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggests a higher prevalence of appropriate
anticoagulation among octogenarians with AF than reported in previous studies.
Further work is needed to develop and disseminate tools to optimize the use of
anticoagulants in this high-risk population.

Copyright © 2016 Canadian Cardiovascular Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cjca.2015.05.012 
PMID: 26277091  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Am J Cardiol. 2015 Oct 1;116(7):1110-5. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2015.06.033. Epub 
2015 Jul 16.

Comparison of Outcomes of Transcatheter Aortic Valve Implantation in Patients
≥90 Years Versus <90 Years.

Abramowitz Y(1), Chakravarty T(1), Jilaihawi H(1), Kashif M(1), Zadikany R(1),
Lee C(1), Matar G(1), Cheng W(1), Makkar RR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cedars-Sinai Heart Institute, Los Angeles, California.
(2)Cedars-Sinai Heart Institute, Los Angeles, California. Electronic address:
Raj.Makkar@cshs.org.

Transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI) for severe aortic stenosis (AS) is
increasingly performed in nonagenarians. There is scarce evidence on the
feasibility and safety of balloon-expandable TAVI in this patient population. A
total of 734 patients who underwent balloon-expandable TAVI at our institute were
included in the study. We compared 136 patients who were aged at least 90 years
at the time of TAVI (mean age 92.4 ± 2.4 years) with the remaining 598 younger
patients (mean age 79.7 ± 7.8 years). Valve Academic Research Consortium 2 end
points were compared between the 2 groups. Diabetes mellitus, coronary artery
disease (CAD), peripheral artery disease (PAD), and chronic lung disease were
significantly less prevalent in patients aged ≥90 years. In contrast, the
prevalence of frailty, chronic renal failure, and atrial fibrillation was
significantly higher in these patients. Device success was 96% in both groups.
All-cause mortality at 30 days and 1 year was 2.9% and 12.5% versus 2.8% and
12.3% in patients aged ≥90 and <90, respectively (p = 0.95 for both). All major
complication rates were similar between groups. Nonagenarians had higher rates of
minor vascular complications (13.2% vs 7.7%; p = 0.04). In conclusion, performing
balloon-expandable TAVI in carefully selected group of nonagenarians is feasible 
and offers clinical benefit comparable to patients aged <90 years. Advanced age, 
in the absence of significant co-morbidities, should not deter clinicians from
evaluating patients for TAVI for severe AS.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2015.06.033 
PMID: 26235927  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


274. BMC Nephrol. 2015 Jul 11;16:104. doi: 10.1186/s12882-015-0084-7.

PAlliative Care in chronic Kidney diSease: the PACKS study--quality of life,
decision making, costs and impact on carers in people managed without dialysis.

Noble HR(1), Agus A(2), Brazil K(3), Burns A(4), Goodfellow NA(5), Guiney M(6),
McCourt F(7), McDowell C(8), Normand C(9), Roderick P(10), Thompson C(11),
Maxwell AP(12), Yaqoob MM(13).

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing and Midwifery, Queen's University Belfast, Medical Biology
Centre: 97 Lisburn Rd, BT9 7BL, Belfast, UK. helen.noble@qub.ac.uk.
(2)Northern Ireland Clinical Trials Unit, 1st Floor Elliott Dynes Building, Royal
Hospitals, Grosvenor Road, Belfast, BT12 6BA, UK. Ashley.Agus@nictu.hscni.net.
(3)School of Nursing and Midwifery, Queen's University Belfast, Medical Biology
Centre: 97 Lisburn Rd, BT9 7BL, Belfast, UK.
(4)Royal Free Hospital, Pond Street, London, NW3 2QN, UK. aine.burns@nhs.net.
(5)Northern Ireland Clinical Trials Unit, 1st Floor Elliott Dynes Building, Royal
Hospitals, Grosvenor Road, Belfast, BT12 6BA, UK.
nicola.goodfellow@nictu.hscni.net.
(6)Northern Ireland Clinical Trials Unit, 1st Floor Elliott Dynes Building, Royal
Hospitals, Grosvenor Road, Belfast, BT12 6BA, UK.
Mary.Guiney@belfasttrust.hscni.net.
(7)Northern Ireland Clinical Trials Unit, 1st Floor Elliott Dynes Building, Royal
Hospitals, Grosvenor Road, Belfast, BT12 6BA, UK. Fiona.McCourt@nictu.hscni.net.
(8)Northern Ireland Clinical Trials Unit, 1st Floor Elliott Dynes Building, Royal
Hospitals, Grosvenor Road, Belfast, BT12 6BA, UK. clionauuj@hotmail.com.
(9)Trinity College Dublin, 3-4 Foster Place, Dublin 2, Ireland. normandc@tcd.ie.
(10)University of Southampton, Mailpoint 805, C floor, South Academic Block,
Southampton General Hospital, Southampton, SO166YD, UK. pjr@soton.ac.uk.
(11)Kidney Patient Association, Northern, Ireland, UK.
(12)School of Medicine, Dentistry and Biomedical Sciences, Queens University
Belfast & Regional Nephrology Unit, Belfast City Hospital, Belfast HSC Trust,
Belfast, UK. A.P.Maxwell@qub.ac.uk.
(13)William Harvey Research Institute, Queen Mary University of London, London & 
Renal Unit, The Royal London Hospital, London, E1 1BB, UK. m.m.yaqoob@qmul.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: The number of patients with advanced chronic kidney disease opting
for conservative management rather than dialysis is unknown but likely to be
growing as increasingly frail patients with advanced renal disease present to
renal services. Conservative kidney management includes ongoing medical input and
support from a multidisciplinary team. There is limited evidence concerning
patient and carer experience of this choice. This study will explore quality of
life, symptoms, cognition, frailty, performance decision making, costs and impact
on carers in people with advanced chronic kidney disease managed without dialysis
and is funded by the National Institute of Health Research in the UK.
METHODS: In this prospective, multicentre, longitudinal study, patients will be
recruited in the UK, by renal research nurses, once they have made the decision
not to embark on dialysis. Carers will be asked to 'opt-in' with consent from
patients. The approach includes longitudinal quantitative surveys of quality of
life, symptoms, decision making and costs for patients and quality of life and
costs for carers, with questionnaires administered quarterly over 12 months.
Additionally, the decision making process will be explored via qualitative
interviews with renal physicians/clinical nurse specialists.
DISCUSSION: The study is designed to capture patient and carer profiles when
conservative kidney management is implemented, and understand trajectories of
care-receiving and care-giving with the aim of optimising palliative care for
this population. It will explore the interactions that lead to clinical care
decisions and the impact of these decisions on informal carers with the intention
of improving clinical outcomes for patients and the experiences of care givers.

DOI: 10.1186/s12882-015-0084-7 
PMCID: PMC4499188
PMID: 26163382  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Postgrad Med. 2015 Aug;127(6):623-9. doi: 10.1080/00325481.2015.1063957. Epub
2015 Jul 9.

Impact of renal aging on drug therapy.

Musso CG(1), Belloso WH, Scibona P, Bellizzi V, Macías Núñez JF.

Author information: 
(1)Nephrology Division, Hospital Italiano de Buenos Aires , Buenos Aires ,
Argentina.

Elderly patients (age ≥ 65 years old) use up to 30% of all commonly prescribed
medication, and they suffer more their adverse effects than the general
population. In order to minimize this risk, physicians should avoid polypharmacy,
dangerous pharmacological interactions and take into account pharmacodynamic and 
senile pharmacokinetic changes before prescribing any medication to the elderly. 
The present review article originally describes how renal physiology changes
secondary to aging such as dysautonomia, glomerular filtration rate reduction,
tubular back-filtration, sodium, calcium and magnesium loss, potassium retention,
altered dilution-concentration capability, tubular frailty, genetics, internal
milieu and body composition are senile changes that when combined predispose
elderly people to suffer from pharmacological adverse effects. Knowledge of these
physiological modifications associated with aging and their impact on the
pharmacology of particular drugs may help to optimize drug use and to avoid
complications in this age group.

DOI: 10.1080/00325481.2015.1063957 
PMID: 26155719  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Int Urol Nephrol. 2015 Aug;47(8):1403-8. doi: 10.1007/s11255-015-1041-x. Epub
2015 Jul 8.

Estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR), 25(OH) D3, chronic kidney disease
(CKD), the MYH9 (myosin heavy chain 9) gene in old and very elderly people.

Otero Gonzalez A(1), Prol MP, Caride MJ, Nores JS, Novoa E, Melon CP, Macia P,
Alves MT, Cid M, Osorio E, Coto E, Macias Nuñez JF.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Nefrología-Unidad Investigación, C.H Universitario de Ourense,
Ourense, Spain.

It is known that the common physiological denominator of the ageing process is an
attenuation of functional performance with respect to the situation of young
people and adults. However, since the first cohort-based longitudinal studies, it
has not been possible to establish a "linear" relationship between age and
glomerular filtration in all cases. This does not mean that there is no
physiological ageing process at all; in addition to those already elucidated, its
mechanisms include cell senescence, podocyte dysfunction, a vitamin D deficiency,
and homozygotic forms of the MYH9 gene. The aim of the present work was to
analyse the prevalence of chronic kidney disease (CKD) and, where possible, the
correlation between CKD, defined by an eGFR < 60 ml/min/1.73 m(2), plasma
25(OH)D3 levels and the MYH9 gene in a population of elderly and very elderly
persons. These parameters have not been evaluated previously in populations of
elderly and very elderly patients. It is concluded that a moderate decrease in
the eGFR occurs with age. This does not imply the presence of CKD in elderly
people, since in most individuals the reduced eGFR is not accompanied by anaemia,
and no individuals show hypocalcaemia, hyperphosphataemia or a high Alb/Cr ratio.
Here we observed a lower Hb level and an elevated Alb/Cr ratio in subjects
heterozygotic for the MYH9 gene. This could be interpreted in the sense that the 
gene could exert some protective effect on renal function, whereas the
heterozygotic form (allele A) of the MYH9 gene could be considered a very early
marker, a new risk factor for the appearance of CKD, or a sign of renal frailty
in elderly people.

DOI: 10.1007/s11255-015-1041-x 
PMID: 26152646  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Ren Nutr. 2015 Nov;25(6):488-93. doi: 10.1053/j.jrn.2015.05.004. Epub 2015 Jun 
30.

Impact of BMI Variations on Survival in Elderly Hemodialysis Patients.

Villain C(1), Ecochard R(2), Genet L(3), Jean G(4), Kuentz F(5), Lataillade D(6),
Legrand E(7), Moreau-Gaudry X(8), Fouque D(9).

Author information: 
(1)Service de Biostatistique, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France; Université
de Lyon, Lyon, France; Université Lyon 1, Villeurbanne, France; CNRS, UMR5558,
Equipe Biostatistique-Santé, Villeurbanne, France; Service de
néphrologie-nutrition-dialyse, Centre Hospitalier Lyon Sud, Lyon, France.
Electronic address: cedric.villain@chu-lyon.fr.
(2)Service de Biostatistique, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France; Université
de Lyon, Lyon, France; Université Lyon 1, Villeurbanne, France; CNRS, UMR5558,
Equipe Biostatistique-Santé, Villeurbanne, France.
(3)Service de néphrologie-nutrition-dialyse, Centre Hospitalier Lyon Sud, Lyon,
France.
(4)NephroCare Tassin-Charcot, Sainte-Foy-lès-Lyon, France.
(5)Centre de Dialyse des Eaux Claires, AGDUC, Grenoble, France.
(6)Service de Néphrologie, Clinique Edouard Rist, Paris, France.
(7)Service de Néphrologie et Hémodialyse, Centre Hospitalier d'Ardèche Nord,
Annonay, France.
(8)Centre de Dialyse, Centre Hospitalier Général, AGDUC, Montélimar, France.
(9)Université de Lyon, Lyon, France; Université Lyon 1, Villeurbanne, France;
Service de néphrologie-nutrition-dialyse, Centre Hospitalier Lyon Sud, Lyon,
France; INSERM CarMeN, CENS, Université Lyon 1, Villeurbanne, France.

OBJECTIVES: In elderly hemodialysis patients, protein-energy wasting is
associated with poor outcome; however, the association between body mass index
(BMI) changes over time, and survival has been seldom studied in this
particularly frail population.
DESIGN AND METHODS: This prospective study recruited 502 hemodialysis patients
aged ≥75 years from the French cohort ARNOS and followed them from 2005 to 2009. 
BMI changes over time were modeled by individual linear regression models.
Survival analyses used frailty Cox models.
RESULTS: The population average age was 80.9 years. Forty-one percent of the
patients died during follow-up. A 1 kg/m(2) lower baseline BMI was associated
with a 4% increase in the risk of death over the study period (hazard ratio [HR] 
1.04, 95% confidence interval [1.01-1.08], P = .02). A 5% BMI loss per year was
associated with a 52% increase in the risk of death (HR 1.52, 95% confidence
interval [1.32-1.75], P < .001). In patients who lost weight (>5% BMI loss per
year), the lower was the baseline BMI, the higher was the HR for death. There was
a similar trend in the patients with stable weight (5% BMI loss-5% BMI gain per
year). In patients who gained weight, the HR was unexpectedly higher than in
those with stable weight.
CONCLUSIONS: In elderly hemodialysis patients, the impact of the BMI percent
change on survival was stronger than that of the baseline BMI. Patients with
stable weight had longer survivals than patients who lost or gained weight. Thus,
in this population, BMI changes should be regularly assessed. Further studies
should assess the safety of weight gain strategies.

Copyright © 2015 National Kidney Foundation, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.jrn.2015.05.004 
PMID: 26139338  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Am J Kidney Dis. 2015 Oct;66(4):666-76. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2015.04.051. Epub
2015 Jun 25.

Dental Health and Mortality in People With End-Stage Kidney Disease Treated With 
Hemodialysis: A Multinational Cohort Study.

Palmer SC(1), Ruospo M(2), Wong G(3), Craig JC(3), Petruzzi M(4), De Benedittis
M(5), Ford P(6), Johnson DW(7), Tonelli M(8), Natale P(9), Saglimbene V(9),
Pellegrini F(10), Celia E(9), Gelfman R(9), Leal MR(9), Torok M(9), Stroumza
P(9), Bednarek-Skublewska A(11), Dulawa J(12), Frantzen L(9), Ferrari JN(9), Del 
Castillo D(9), Bernat AG(9), Hegbrant J(9), Wollheim C(9), Gargano L(9), Bots
CP(13), Strippoli GF(14); ORAL-D Study Investigators.

Collaborators: Raña S, Serrano M, Claros S, Arias M, Petracci L, Arana M, De Rosa
P, Gutierrez A, Simon M, Vergara V, Tosi M, Cernadas M, Vilamajó I, Gravac D,
Paulón M, Penayo L, Carrizo G, Ghiani M, Perez G, Da Cruz O, Galarce D, Gravielle
M, Vescovo E, Paparone R, Mato Mira C, Mojico E, Hermida O, Florio D, Yucoswky M,
Labonia W, Rubio D, Di Napoli G, Fernandez A, Altman H, Rodriguez J, Serrano S,
Valle G, Lobos M, Acosta V, Corpacci G, Jofre M, Gianoni L, Chiesura G, Capdevila
M, Montenegro J, Bequi J, Dayer J, Gómez A, Calderón C, Abrego E, Cechín C,
García J, Corral J, Natiello M, Coronel A, Muñiz M, Muñiz V, Bonelli A, Sanchez
F, Maestre S, Olivera S, Camargo M, Avalos V, Geandet E, Canteli M, Escobar A,
Sena E, Tirado S, Peñalba A, Neme G, Cisneros M, Oliszewski R, Nascar V, Daud M, 
Mansilla S, Paredes Álvarez A, Gamín L, Arijón M, Coombes M, Zapata M, Boriceanu 
C, Frantzen-Trendel S, Albert K, Csaszar I, Kiss E, Kosa D, Orosz A, Redl J,
Kovacs L, Varga E, Szabo M, Magyar K, Kriza G, Zajko E, Bereczki A, Csikos J,
Kuti A, Mike A, Steiner K, Nemeth E, Tolnai K, Toth A, Vinczene J, Szummer S,
Tanyi E, Toth R, Szilvia M, Dambrosio N, Paparella G, Sambati M, Donatelli C,
Pedone F, Cagnazzo VA, Antinoro R, Torsello F, Saturno C, Giannoccaro G, Maldera 
S, Boccia E, Mantuano M, Di Toro Mammarella R, Meconizzi M, Steri PF, Riccardi C,
Flammini A, Moscardelli L, Murgo M, San Filippo N, Pagano S, Marino G, Montalto
G, Cantarella S, Salamone B, Randazzo G, Rallo D, Maniscalco A, Fici M, Lupo A,
Pellegrino P, Fichera R, D'Angelo A, Falsitta N, Bochenska-Nowacka E, Jaroszynski
A, Drabik J, Birecka M, Daniewska D, Drobisz M, Doskocz K, Wyrwicz G,
Inchaustegui L, Outerelo C, Sousa Mendes D, Mendes A, Lopes J, Barbas J, Madeira 
C, Fortes A, Vizinho R, Cortesão A, Almeida E, Bernat A, De la Torre B, Lopez A, 
Martín J, Cuesta G, Rodriguez RM, Ros F, Garcia M, Orero E, Ros E, Caetano A,
MacGregor K, Santos M, Silva Pinheiro S, Martins L, Leitão D, Izidoro C, Bava G, 
Bora A, Gorena H, Calderón T, Dupuy R, Alonso N, Siciliano V, Frantzen-Trendel S,
Nagy K, Bajusz Ö, Pinke I, Decsi G, Gyergyoi L, Jobba Z, Zalai Z, Zsedenyi Á,
Kiss G, Pinter M, Kereszturi M, Petruzzi M, De Benedittis M, Szkutnik J,
Sieczkarek J, Capelo A, Garcia Gallart M, Mendieta C.

Author information: 
(1)University of Otago, Christchurch, New Zealand.
(2)Diaverum Medical Scientific Office, Lund, Sweden; Amedeo Avogadro University
of Eastern Piedmont, Novara, Italy.
(3)University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.
(4)University of Bari, Bari, Italy.
(5)Universita' del Piemonte Orientale, Vercelli, Italy.
(6)University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.
(7)University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia; Translational Research
Institute, Brisbane, Australia.
(8)University of Calgary, Calgary, Canada.
(9)Diaverum Medical Scientific Office, Lund, Sweden.
(10)Global Medical Biogen Idec, Cambridge, MA.
(11)Diaverum Medical Scientific Office, Lund, Sweden; Medical University of
Lublin, Lublin.
(12)Diaverum Medical Scientific Office, Lund, Sweden; Medical University of
Silesia, Silesia, Poland.
(13)Academic Centre for Dentistry Amsterdam (ACTA), Oral Biochemistry, Amsterdam,
the Netherlands.
(14)Diaverum Medical Scientific Office, Lund, Sweden; University of Sydney,
Sydney, Australia; University of Bari, Bari, Italy; Diaverum Academy, Lund,
Sweden. Electronic address: gfmstrippoli@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Dental disease is more extensive in adults with chronic kidney
disease, but whether dental health and behaviors are associated with survival in 
the setting of hemodialysis is unknown.
STUDY DESIGN: Prospective multinational cohort.
SETTING & PARTICIPANTS: 4,205 adults treated with long-term hemodialysis, 2010 to
2012 (Oral Diseases in Hemodialysis [ORAL-D] Study).
PREDICTORS: Dental health as assessed by a standardized dental examination using 
World Health Organization guidelines and personal oral care, including
edentulousness; decayed, missing, and filled teeth index; teeth brushing and
flossing; and dental health consultation.
OUTCOMES: All-cause and cardiovascular mortality at 12 months after dental
assessment.
MEASUREMENTS: Multivariable-adjusted Cox proportional hazards regression models
fitted with shared frailty to account for clustering of mortality risk within
countries.
RESULTS: During a mean follow-up of 22.1 months, 942 deaths occurred, including
477 cardiovascular deaths. Edentulousness (adjusted HR, 1.29; 95% CI, 1.10-1.51) 
and decayed, missing, or filled teeth score ≥ 14 (adjusted HR, 1.70; 95% CI,
1.33-2.17) were associated with early all-cause mortality, while dental flossing,
using mouthwash, brushing teeth daily, spending at least 2 minutes on oral
hygiene daily, changing a toothbrush at least every 3 months, and visiting a
dentist within the past 6 months (adjusted HRs of 0.52 [95% CI, 0.32-0.85], 0.79 
[95% CI, 0.64-0.97], 0.76 [95% CI, 0.58-0.99], 0.84 [95% CI, 0.71-0.99], 0.79
[95% CI, 0.65-0.95], and 0.79 [95% CI, 0.65-0.96], respectively) were associated 
with better survival. Results for cardiovascular mortality were similar.
LIMITATIONS: Convenience sample of clinics.
CONCLUSIONS: In adults treated with hemodialysis, poorer dental health was
associated with early death, whereas preventive dental health practices were
associated with longer survival.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2015.04.051 
PMID: 26120038  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Vasc Access. 2015 Nov-Dec;16(6):439-45. doi: 10.5301/jva.5000440. Epub 2015 Jun
24.

Optimizing outcomes in the elderly with end-stage renal disease--live long and
prosper.

Masengu A(1)(2), Hanko JB(1), Maxwell AP(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Regional Nephrology Unit, Belfast City Hospital, Belfast, Northern Ireland -
UK.
(2)Nephrology Research Group, Centre for Public Health, Queen's University
Belfast, Royal Victoria Hospital, Belfast, Northern Ireland - UK.

Comment in
    J Vasc Access. 2015 Nov-Dec;16(6):437-8.

BACKGROUND: The elderly form an expanding proportion of patients with chronic
kidney disease and end-stage renal disease worldwide. The increased physiological
frailty and functional morbidity associated with the aging process pose unique
challenges when planning optimal management of an older patient needing renal
replacement therapy (RRT).
AIMS: This position paper discusses current evidence regarding the optimal
management of end-stage renal disease in the elderly with an emphasis on
hemodialysis since it is the most common modality used in older patients. Further
research is needed to define relevant patient-reported outcome measures for
end-stage renal disease including functional assessments and psychological
impacts of various forms of RRT. For those older patients who have opted for
dialysis treatment, it is important to study the strategies that encourage
greater uptake of home-based dialysis therapies and optimal vascular access.
CONCLUSIONS: The management of advanced chronic kidney disease in the elderly can
be challenging but also extremely rewarding. The key issue is adopting a
patient-focused and individualized approach that seeks to achieve the best
outcomes based on a comprehensive holistic assessment of what is important to the
patient.

DOI: 10.5301/jva.5000440 
PMID: 26109536  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Am Heart J. 2015 Jul;170(1):141-8, 148.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2015.03.017. Epub
2015 Apr 1.

Patients' time in therapeutic range on warfarin among US patients with atrial
fibrillation: Results from ORBIT-AF registry.

Pokorney SD(1), Simon DN(2), Thomas L(2), Fonarow GC(3), Kowey PR(4), Chang P(5),
Singer DE(6), Ansell J(7), Blanco RG(2), Gersh B(8), Mahaffey KW(9), Hylek
EM(10), Go AS(11), Piccini JP(1), Peterson ED(12); Outcomes Registry for Better
Informed Treatment of Atrial Fibrillation (ORBIT-AF) Investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC; Duke Clinical Research Institute, 
Durham, NC.
(2)Duke Clinical Research Institute, Durham, NC.
(3)Division of Cardiology, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
CA.
(4)Lankenau Institute for Medical Research, Wynnewood, PA.
(5)Janssen Scientific Affairs, Raritan, NJ.
(6)Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA.
(7)Lenox Hill Hospital, New York, NY.
(8)Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(9)Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, CA.
(10)Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA.
(11)Kaiser Permanente, Oakland, CA.
(12)Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC; Duke Clinical Research Institute,
Durham, NC. Electronic address: eric.peterson@duke.edu.

BACKGROUND: Time in therapeutic range (TTR) of international normalized ratio
(INR) of 2.0 to 3.0 is important for the safety and effectiveness of warfarin
anticoagulation. There are few data on TTR among patients with atrial
fibrillation (AF) in community-based clinical practice.
METHODS: Using the US Outcomes Registry for Better Informed Treatment of Atrial
Fibrillation (ORBIT-AF), we examined TTR (using a modified Rosendaal method)
among 5,210 patients with AF on warfarin and treated at 155 sites. Patients were 
grouped into quartiles based on TTR data. Multivariable logistic regression
modeling with generalized estimating equations was used to determine patient and 
provider factors associated with the lowest (worst) TTR.
RESULTS: Overall, 59% of the measured INR values were between 2.0 and 3.0, with
an overall mean and median TTR of 65% ± 20% and 68% (interquartile range [IQR]
53%-79%). The median times below and above the therapeutic range were 17% (IQR
8%-29%) and 10% (IQR 3%-19%), respectively. Patients with renal dysfunction,
advanced heart failure, frailty, prior valve surgery, and higher risk for
bleeding (ATRIA score) or stroke (CHA2DS2-VASc score) had significantly lower TTR
(P < .0001 for all). Patients treated at anticoagulation clinics had only
slightly higher median TTR (69%) than those not (66%) (P < .0001).
CONCLUSIONS: Among patients with AF in US clinical practices, TTR on warfarin is 
suboptimal, and those at highest predicted risks for stroke and bleeding were
least likely to be in therapeutic range.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ahj.2015.03.017 
PMID: 26093875  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Nephrol Ther. 2015 Jul;11(4):246-9. doi: 10.1016/j.nephro.2015.03.004. Epub 2015 
Jun 17.

[Falls among hemodialysis patients: Incidence and risk factors].

[Article in French]

Noto-Kadou-Kaza B(1), Teuwafeu DG(2), Sabi KA(3), Zenasni N(2), Amekoudi EY(3),
Tsevi CM(3), Mahamat M(2), Bikinga YA(2), El Khayat S(2), Zamd M(2), Medkouri
G(2), Benghanem MG(2), Ramdani B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Service de néphrologie, de dialyse et transplantation rénale, CHU Ibn Rochd,
1, quartier des Hôpitaux, Casablanca, Maroc. Electronic address:
bfanotokadoukaza@yahoo.fr.
(2)Service de néphrologie, de dialyse et transplantation rénale, CHU Ibn Rochd,
1, quartier des Hôpitaux, Casablanca, Maroc.
(3)Service de néphrologie et d'hémodialyse, CHU Sylvanus Olympio de Lomé, Lomé,
Togo.

Falls and mineral and bones disorders are both implicated in the occurrence of
pathological fractures in patients undergoing chronic dialysis. However, data on 
falls among this population are rare. We carried out a prospective study during
four weeks and included 70 patients on chronic hemodialysis with the main
objectives being to evaluate the incidence of falls and factors related to it. At
the end of the four weeks, 16 patients (22.86%) fell at least once, with a total 
of 17 falls during 4 weeks, giving an incidence of 3.2 falls per patient/year.
The mean age was 40 ± 16 years. Five patients (31.2%) had a past history of
pathological fractures. Ten patients (62.5%) presented intra- and post-dialysis
hypotension, six (37.5%) was diagnosed of gait disorders and two (12.5%) had
sensory deficit of the lower limbs. Six patients (37.5%) presented frailty.
Hypotension (P=0.004), frailty (P=0.047) and sensory deficit (P=0.049) were
significantly associated with the occurrence of falls. The incidence of falls is 
relatively high in our hemodialysis patients and real risk factors exist. Hence, 
it is important to implement programs for falls prevention to reduce their
incidence and impact.

Copyright © 2015 Association Société de néphrologie. Published by Elsevier SAS.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nephro.2015.03.004 
PMID: 26093492  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Radiographics. 2015 Jul-Aug;35(4):1263-85. doi: 10.1148/rg.2015140130. Epub 2015 
Jun 12.

Geriatric Trauma: A Radiologist's Guide to Imaging Trauma Patients Aged 65 Years 
and Older.

Sadro CT(1), Sandstrom CK(1), Verma N(1), Gunn ML(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Radiology, Harborview Medical Center, 325 Ninth Ave,
Seattle, WA 98104-2499.

Radiologists play an important role in evaluation of geriatric trauma patients.
Geriatric patients have injury patterns that differ markedly from those seen in
younger adults and are susceptible to serious injury from minor trauma. The
spectrum of trauma in geriatric patients includes head and spine injury, chest
and rib trauma, blunt abdominal injury, pelvic fractures, and extremity
fractures. Clinical evaluation of geriatric trauma patients is difficult because 
of overall frailty, comorbid illness, and medication effects. Specific attention 
should be focused on the effects of medications in this population, including
anticoagulants, steroids, and bisphosphonates. Radiologists should use
age-appropriate algorithms for radiography, computed tomography (CT), and
magnetic resonance imaging of geriatric trauma patients and follow guidelines for
intravenous contrast agent administration in elderly patients with impaired renal
function. Because there is less concern about risk for cancer with use of
ionizing radiation in this age group, CT is the primary imaging modality used in 
the setting of geriatric trauma. Clinical examples are provided from the authors'
experience at a trauma center where geriatric patients who have sustained major
and minor injuries are treated daily.

©RSNA, 2015.

DOI: 10.1148/rg.2015140130 
PMID: 26065932  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Am J Kidney Dis. 2015 Nov;66(5):768-74. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2015.04.041. Epub
2015 Jun 2.

Association between kidney function, rehabilitation outcome, and survival in
older patients discharged from inpatient rehabilitation.

Doyle EM(1), Sloan JM(2), Goodbrand JA(1), McMurdo ME(1), Donnan PT(3),
McGilchrist MM(3), Frost H(4), Witham MD(5).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Institute, University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Renal Medicine, NHS Tayside, Dundee, United Kingdom.
(3)Population Health Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom.
(4)Scottish Collaboration for Public Health Research and Policy, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland.
(5)Medical Research Institute, University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom.
Electronic address: m.witham@dundee.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is common in older people, but it is
unclear if it affects survival and rehabilitation outcomes independent of
comorbid conditions and physical function in this population.
STUDY DESIGN: Cohort analysis of prospective, routinely collected, linked
clinical data sets.
SETTING & PARTICIPANTS: Patients discharged from a single inpatient geriatric
rehabilitation center over a 12-year period.
PREDICTORS: Admission estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) category as a
predictor of improvement in the 20-point Barthel score (activities of daily
living measure) during rehabilitation; discharge eGFR category and Barthel score 
as predictors of survival postdischarge.
OUTCOMES: Survival postdischarge was modeled using Cox regression analyses,
unadjusted and adjusted for age, sex, morbidities (ischemic heart disease,
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, stroke, diabetes, and heart failure),
Barthel score and eGFR category on discharge, and serum calcium, hemoglobin, and 
albumin levels. The effect of admission eGFR category on change in Barthel score 
during admission was modeled using analysis of covariance, adjusted for
admission, Barthel score, and comorbid conditions.
RESULTS: 3,012 patients were included; mean age, 84 years. 2,394 patients died
during a mean follow-up of 8.3 years. Compared with patients with eGFR of 60 to
89mL/min/1.73m(2), adjusted HRs for death were 1.26 (95% CI, 1.13-1.40), 1.45
(95% CI, 1.29-1.63), and 1.68 (95% CI, 1.42-1.99) for eGFR categories of 45 to
59, 30 to 44, and <30mL/min/1.73m(2), respectively. The relationship between
discharge Barthel score and survival was similar within each discharge eGFR
category (HRs of 0.95, 0.93, 0.92, 0.95, and 0.90 per Barthel score point within 
eGFR categories of ≥90, 60-89, 45-59, 30-44, and <30mL/min/1.73m(2); P for
interaction = 0.2). Similar improvements in Barthel score between admission and
discharge were seen for each admission eGFR category.
LIMITATIONS: Single-center study using routinely collected clinical data.
CONCLUSIONS: eGFR category and Barthel score are independent risk markers for
survival in older rehabilitation patients, but advanced CKD does not preclude
successful rehabilitation.

Copyright © 2015 National Kidney Foundation, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2015.04.041 
PMID: 26048443  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Health Qual Life Outcomes. 2015 May 29;13:70. doi: 10.1186/s12955-015-0270-0.

Influence of frailty on health-related quality of life in pre-dialysis patients
with chronic kidney disease in Korea: a cross-sectional study.

Lee SJ(1), Son H(2), Shin SK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Red Cross College of Nursing, Chung-Ang University, 84 Heukseok-ro,
Dongjak-gu, Seoul, South Korea. lsj1109@cau.ac.kr.
(2)Red Cross College of Nursing, Chung-Ang University, 84 Heukseok-ro,
Dongjak-gu, Seoul, South Korea. hson@cau.ac.kr.
(3)National Health Insurance Cooperation Ilsan Hospital Clinical Professor,
Yonsei University Medical College, Seoul, South Korea.

BACKGROUND: Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is a progressive and lifelong condition 
with multiple medical comorbidities. Patients with CKD experience frailty more
frequently and have lower health-related quality of life than do those with other
chronic diseases. The purpose of this study was to examine the prevalence of
frailty and investigate the contribution of frailty to quality of life in
pre-dialysis CKD patients in Korea.
METHODS: Using a cross-sectional survey design, data were collected at an
outpatient CKD clinic in a general hospital in Korea. The frailty criterion was
modified from previous studies. The Short Form-36 Health Survey version 2 was
used to measure physical and mental component summary scores. Data were analyzed 
using chi-square, t-tests, and hierarchical linear regression.
RESULTS: Of the 168 CKD patients, 63 (37.5 %) were frail. Frail patients were
significantly older and had lower physical and mental quality of life than those 
who were non-frail. In hierarchical regression evaluating the influence of
frailty on physical and mental quality of life, the initial model was
significantly improved when frailty was included. Frail patients had lower
physical and mental quality of life.
CONCLUSIONS: Frailty affected both physical and mental quality of life in
pre-dialysis patients with CKD. More attention should be paid to the potential
role of early detection and prevention of frailty to improve patients' quality of
life.

DOI: 10.1186/s12955-015-0270-0 
PMCID: PMC4460686
PMID: 26021987  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Int Urol Nephrol. 2015 Jul;47(7):1231-2. doi: 10.1007/s11255-015-1010-4. Epub
2015 May 21.

Are currently GFR estimating equations and standard Kt/V value adequate for
advanced chronic kidney disease (CKD) frail elderly patients?

Musso CG(1), Alvarez-Gregori J, Jauregui J, Núñez JF.

Author information: 
(1)Ageing Biology Unit, Hospital Italiano de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires,
Argentina, carlos.musso@hospitalitaliano.org.ar.

Chronic kidney disease (CKD) elderly patients have a reduced glomerular
filtration rate (GFR) due to the combination of ageing and chronic nephropathy
damage. This situation is very important to be taken into account in order to
prescribe an adequate medication and dialysis dose in this aged group. Besides,
cognitive and urinary incontinence problems make difficult to obtain an adequate 
24-h urine collection in order to evaluate creatinine clearance in this group.
Thus, a reliable GFR estimating equation would be very useful for assisting
elderly CKD patients. Additionally, Kt/V is the main parameter currently used for
dosing dialysis in stage V CKD young and elderly patients. However, frailty and
sarcopenia are prevalent disorders usually suffered by old people, who also
present many physiological changes that could make GFR estimating equations and
standard Kt/V value to become unreliable in this particular group. In conclusion,
based on all these facts, it seems crucial for clinical geriatric nephrology to
carefully evaluate how reliable current GFR estimating equations are, as well as 
which would be an adequate Kt/V value in CKD frail elderly patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s11255-015-1010-4 
PMID: 25993909  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


286. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 2015 Oct 1;16(10):842-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jamda.2015.03.027.
Epub 2015 May 5.

A Frailty Index Based on Common Laboratory Tests in Comparison With a Clinical
Frailty Index for Older Adults in Long-Term Care Facilities.

Rockwood K(1), McMillan M(2), Mitnitski A(3), Howlett SE(4).

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Geriatric Medicine and Neurology, Department of Medicine,
Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada; Department of Geriatric
Medicine and Institute of Brain, Behavior and Neurosciences, University of
Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom; Geriatric Medicine Research Unit,
Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada; Center for Health Care of the
Elderly, Nova Scotia Health Authority, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada. Electronic
address: kenneth.rockwood@dal.ca.
(2)Geriatric Medicine Research Unit, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, 
Canada; Center for Health Care of the Elderly, Nova Scotia Health Authority,
Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
(3)Department of Medicine, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada;
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova
Scotia, Canada.
(4)Geriatric Medicine Research Unit, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, 
Canada; Center for Health Care of the Elderly, Nova Scotia Health Authority,
Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada; Division of Geriatric Medicine, Departments of
Pharmacology and Medicine, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada;
Department of Physiology, Institute of Cardiovascular Sciences, University of
Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.

INTRODUCTION: Easily employed measures of frailty are needed in the evaluation of
elderly people. Recently, a frailty index (FI) based on deficits in commonly used
laboratory tests (the FI-LAB) has been proposed. To address the usefulness of the
FI-LAB in long-term care (LTC) settings, we studied institutionalized
participants in the Canadian Study of Health and Aging first clinical examination
database. Our objectives were to compare the FI-LAB with a clinical FI LTC
(FI-Clinical-LTC) focused on common health deficits seen in LTC and to assay its 
relationship with mortality.
METHODS: In this secondary analysis, Canadian Study of Health and Aging first
clinical examination participants who, at baseline, were LTC residents, and who
consented to having blood drawn for 21 commonly employed laboratory tests (eg,
complete blood count, electrolytes, renal, thyroid, and liver function) were
studied. A 23-item FI-LAB was constructed based on the 21 laboratory tests, plus 
measures of systolic and diastolic blood pressure. The FI-Clinical-LTC was
constructed from data obtained during the clinical evaluation and the FI-LAB was 
constructed from laboratory data plus systolic and diastolic blood pressure
measurements. A combined FI (FI-Combined) included all items from each index.
Predictive validity was tested using Cox proportional hazards analysis and
overall utility was evaluated using the Akaike Information Criterion and the Wald
statistic.
RESULTS: The mean FI-Clinical-LTC was 0.32 ± 0.14, the FI-LAB was 0.26 ± 0.11 and
the FI-Combined was 0.30 ± 0.11. There was a strong linear relationship (Pearson 
correlation coefficient = 0.95) between the FI-LAB and the FI-Clinical-LTC, with 
a significant slope of 0.18 (P value of <.0001). Strong relationships with
mortality were demonstrated through Kaplan-Meier curves and Cox regressions, with
the FI-Clinical-LTC having a hazard ratio of 1.03, FI-LAB ratio of 1.02, and
FI-combined ratio of 1.04 for each 0.01 increment in the corresponding FI in age 
and sex adjusted models.
CONCLUSIONS: An FI based on routinely collected laboratory data can identify LTC 
residents at increased risk of death. This approach may be a useful screening
tool in this setting.

Copyright © 2015 AMDA – The Society for Post-Acute and Long-Term Care Medicine.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jamda.2015.03.027 
PMID: 25952475  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Anaesth Intensive Care. 2015 May;43(3):361-8.

Predicting intensive care and hospital outcome with the Dalhousie Clinical
Frailty Scale: a pilot assessment.

Fisher C(1), Karalapillai DK(2), Bailey M(3), Glassford NG(4), Bellomo R(5),
Jones D(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Austin Hospital, Heidelberg, Victoria.
(2)Austin Health, Melbourne, Victoria.
(3)Department of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, Monash University,
Melbourne, Victoria.
(4)School of Public Health and Preventative Medicine, Monash University,
Melbourne, Victoria.
(5)Austin Health and School of Public Health and Preventive Medicine, Monash
University, Melbourne, Victoria.
(6)Critical Care Outreach, Austin Health and Department of Epidemiology and
Preventive Medicine, Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria.

Frailty may help to predict intensive care unit (ICU) patient outcome. The
Dalhousie Clinical Frailty Scale (DCFS) is validated to assess frailty in
ambulatory settings but has not been investigated in Australian ICUs. We
conducted a prospective three-month study of patients admitted to a tertiary
level ICU. Within 24 hours of ICU admission, the next of kin or nurse in charge
assigned a DCFS score to the patient. Data were obtained to assess the
association between frailty and patient outcome. The DCFS score was completed in 
205 of 348 (59%) of eligible patient admissions. The mean DCFS score was 3.2
(±1.6). Overall frailty (DCFS>4) occurred in 28 of 205 patients (13%, confidence 
interval 9% to 17%), 13 of 93 (15%, confidence interval 10% to 25%) in patients
aged >65 years and 5 of 11 (45%, confidence interval 21% to 71%) in those>85
years. Patients with chronic liver disease (P<0.001) and end-stage renal failure 
(P=0.009) were more likely to be frail. The DCFS score was not significantly
associated with ICU or hospital mortality: odds ratio 0.98 (95% confidence
interval 0.6 to 1.6) and odds ratio 1.07 (95% confidence interval 0.8 to 1.4),
respectively. However, after adjustment for illness severity and requirement for 
palliative care, the DCFS score was significantly associated with increased (log)
hospital length-of-stay (P=0.04) and age (P=0.001). Approximately 1 in 10 ICU
patients were frail and this frequency increased with age. The DCFS was
associated with patient age and comorbidities and potentially predicts increased 
hospital length-of-stay but not other outcomes. Strategies to improve compliance 
with DCFS completion are needed.


PMID: 25943611  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


288. BMC Geriatr. 2015 Apr 29;15:56. doi: 10.1186/s12877-015-0056-6.

Expert opinion on the management of pain in hospitalised older patients with
cognitive impairment: a mixed methods analysis of a national survey.

Rodger KT(1), Greasley-Adams C(2), Hodge Z(3), Reynish E(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, NHS Fife, Victoria Hospital, Hayfield Road, 
Kirkcaldy, KY2 5AH, UK. kirstyrodger@nhs.net.
(2)School of Applied Social Science, University of Stirling, Colin Bell Building,
Stirling, FK9 4LA, UK. corinne.greasley-adams@stir.ac.uk.
(3)Acute Pain Service, NHS Fife, Victoria Hospital, Hayfield Road, Kirkcaldy, KY2
5AH, UK. zoe.hodge@nhs.net.
(4)Department of Geriatric Medicine, NHS Fife, Victoria Hospital, Hayfield Road, 
Kirkcaldy, KY2 5AH, UK. emma.reynish@stir.ac.uk.
(5)School of Applied Social Science, University of Stirling, Colin Bell Building,
Stirling, FK9 4LA, UK. emma.reynish@stir.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Hospitalised older patients are complex. Comorbidity and polypharmacy
complicate frailty. Significant numbers have dementia and/or cognitive
impairment. Pain is highly prevalent. The evidence base for pain management in
cognitively impaired individuals is sparse due to methodological issues. A wealth
of expert opinion is recognised potentially providing a useful evidence base for 
guiding clinical practice. The study aimed to gather expert opinion on pain
management in cognitively impaired hospitalised older people.
METHODS: Consultant Geriatricians listed as dementia leads in the National
Dementia Audit were contacted electronically and invited to respond. The
questionnaire sought information on their role, confidence and approach to pain
management in cognitively impaired hospitalised patients. Responses were analysed
using a mixed methods approach.
RESULTS: Respondents considered themselves very confident in the clinical field. 
Awareness of potential to do harm was highly evident. Unequivocally responses
suggested paracetamol is safe and should be first choice analgesic, newer opiates
should be used preferentially in renal impairment and nefopam is unsafe. A
grading of the safety profile of specific medications became apparent, prompting 
requirement for further evaluation and holistic assessment.
CONCLUSION: The lack of consensus reached highlights the complexity of this
clinical field. The use of paracetamol first line, newer opiates in renal
impairment and avoidance of nefopam are immediately transferrable to clinical
practice. Further review, evaluation and comparison of the risks associated with 
other specific analgesics are necessary before a comprehensive clinical guideline
can be produced.

DOI: 10.1186/s12877-015-0056-6 
PMCID: PMC4419491
PMID: 25928876  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2016 Jul;31(7):1070-7. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfv122. Epub
2015 Apr 24.

Muscle wasting in end-stage renal disease promulgates premature death:
established, emerging and potential novel treatment strategies.

Stenvinkel P(1), Carrero JJ(1), von Walden F(2), Ikizler TA(3), Nader GA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Renal Medicine, CLINTEC, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden.
(2)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden.
(3)Division of Nephrology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, USA.
(4)Department of Kinesiology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
USA.

Muscle wasting (or sarcopenia) is a common feature of the uremic phenotype and
predisposes this vulnerable patient population to increased risk of comorbid
complications, poor quality of life, frailty and premature death. The old age of 
dialysis patients is in addition a likely contributor to loss of muscle mass. As 
recent evidence suggests that assessment of muscle strength (i.e. function) is a 
better predictor of outcome and comorbidities than muscle mass, this opens new
screening, assessment and therapeutic opportunities. Among established treatment 
strategies, the benefit of resistance exercise and endurance training are
increasingly recognized among nephrologists as being effective and should be
promoted in sedentary chronic kidney disease patients. Testosterone and growth
hormone replacement appear as the most promising among emerging treatments
strategies for muscle wasting. As treatment of muscle wasting is difficult and
seldom successful in this often old, frail, sedentary and exercise-hesitant
patient group, novel treatment strategies are urgently needed. In this review, we
summarize recent studies on stimulation of mitochondrial biogenesis, myogenic
stem (satellite) cells and manipulation of transforming growth factor family
members, all of which hold promise for more effective therapies to target muscle 
mass loss and function in the future.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of ERA-EDTA.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1093/ndt/gfv122 
PMID: 25910496  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


290. BMC Geriatr. 2015 Apr 24;15:52. doi: 10.1186/s12877-015-0051-y.

Perceived frailty and measured frailty among adults undergoing hemodialysis: a
cross-sectional analysis.

Salter ML(1)(2)(3), Gupta N(4), Massie AB(5)(6), McAdams-DeMarco MA(7)(8), Law
AH(9)(10), Jacob RL(11), Gimenez LF(12), Jaar BG(13)(14)(15)(16), Walston
JD(17)(18)(19), Segev DL(20)(21).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins University School of Public Health, 
Baltimore, MD, USA. meg@jhmi.edu.
(2)Johns Hopkins University Center on Aging and Health, Baltimore, MD, USA.
meg@jhmi.edu.
(3)Department of Surgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 720
Rutland Ave, Ross 36, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. meg@jhmi.edu.
(4)Department of Surgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 720
Rutland Ave, Ross 36, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. ngupta21@jhmi.edu.
(5)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins University School of Public Health, 
Baltimore, MD, USA. amassie1@jhmi.edu.
(6)Department of Surgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 720
Rutland Ave, Ross 36, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. amassie1@jhmi.edu.
(7)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins University School of Public Health, 
Baltimore, MD, USA. mara@jhu.edu.
(8)Department of Surgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 720
Rutland Ave, Ross 36, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. mara@jhu.edu.
(9)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins University School of Public Health, 
Baltimore, MD, USA. alaw6@jhu.edu.
(10)Department of Surgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 720
Rutland Ave, Ross 36, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. alaw6@jhu.edu.
(11)Center for Health Systems Effectiveness, Oregon Health and Science
University, Portland, OR, USA. jacobl@ohsu.edu.
(12)Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 1830
Building Room 416 Nephrology, 600 North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD, 21287, USA. 
lgimene1@jhmi.edu.
(13)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins University School of Public Health,
Baltimore, MD, USA. bjaar@jhmi.edu.
(14)Welch Center for Prevention, Epidemiology and Clinical Research, Baltimore,
MD, USA. bjaar@jhmi.edu.
(15)Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 1830
Building Room 416 Nephrology, 600 North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD, 21287, USA. 
bjaar@jhmi.edu.
(16)Nephrology Center of Maryland, 5601 Loch Raven Boulevard, Suite 3 North,
Baltimore, MD, 21239, USA. bjaar@jhmi.edu.
(17)Johns Hopkins University Center on Aging and Health, Baltimore, MD, USA.
jwalston@jhmi.edu.
(18)Department of Geriatric Medicine and Gerontology, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, 5501 Hopkins Bayview Circle, Room 1A.62, Baltimore, MD,
21224, USA. jwalston@jhmi.edu.
(19)Johns Hopkins Asthma and Allergy Center, 5501 Hopkins Bayview Cir, Baltimore,
MD, 21224, US. jwalston@jhmi.edu.
(20)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins University School of Public Health,
Baltimore, MD, USA. dorry@jhmi.edu.
(21)Department of Surgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 720
Rutland Ave, Ross 36, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. dorry@jhmi.edu.

BACKGROUND: Frailty, a validated measure of physiologic reserve, predicts adverse
health outcomes among adults with end-stage renal disease. Frailty typically is
not measured clinically; instead, a surrogate-perceived frailty-is used to inform
clinical decision-making. Because correlations between perceived and measured
frailty remain unknown, the aim of this study was to assess their relationship.
METHODS: 146 adults undergoing hemodialysis were recruited from a single dialysis
center in Baltimore, Maryland. Patient characteristics associated with perceived 
(reported by nephrologists, nurse practitioners (NPs), or patients) or measured
frailty (using the Fried criteria) were identified using ordered logistic
regression. The relationship between perceived and measured frailty was assessed 
using percent agreement, kappa statistic, Pearson's correlation coefficient, and 
prevalence of misclassification of frailty. Patient characteristics associated
with misclassification were determined using Fisher's exact tests, t-tests, or
median tests.
RESULTS: Older age (adjusted OR [aOR] = 1.36, 95%CI:1.11-1.68, P = 0.003 per
5-years older) and comorbidity (aOR = 1.49, 95%CI:1.27-1.75, P < 0.001 per
additional comorbidity) were associated with greater likelihood of
nephrologist-perceived frailty. Being non-African American was associated with
greater likelihood of NP- (aOR = 5.51, 95%CI:3.21-9.48, P = 0.003) and patient-
(aOR = 4.20, 95%CI:1.61-10.9, P = 0.003) perceived frailty. Percent agreement
between perceived and measured frailty was poor (nephrologist, NP, and patient:
64.1%, 67.0%, and 55.5%). Among non-frail participants, 34.4%, 30.0%, and 31.6%
were perceived as frail by a nephrologist, NP, or themselves. Older adults (P <
0.001) were more likely to be misclassified as frail by a nephrologist; women (P 
= 0.04) and non-African Americans (P = 0.02) were more likely to be misclassified
by an NP. Neither age, sex, nor race was associated with patient
misclassification.
CONCLUSIONS: Perceived frailty is an inadequate proxy for measured frailty among 
patients undergoing hemodialysis.

DOI: 10.1186/s12877-015-0051-y 
PMCID: PMC4428253
PMID: 25903561  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Crit Care Med. 2015 Jul;43(7):1352-60. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000001024.

The Very Elderly Admitted to ICU: A Quality Finish?

Heyland D(1), Cook D, Bagshaw SM, Garland A, Stelfox HT, Mehta S, Dodek P,
Kutsogiannis J, Burns K, Muscedere J, Turgeon AF, Fowler R, Jiang X, Day AG;
Canadian Critical Care Trials Group; Canadian Researchers at the End of Life
Network.

Author information: 
(1)1Clinical Evaluation Research Unit, Kingston General Hospital, Kingston, ON,
Canada. 2Department of Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
3Department of Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, McMaster University,
Hamilton, ON, Canada. 4Division of Critical Care Medicine, Faculty of Medicine
and Dentistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada. 5Department of
Medicine, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada. 6Department of Community 
Health Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada. 7Department of
Critical Care Medicine, Institute for Public Health, University of Calgary,
Calgary, AB, Canada. 8Alberta Health Services-Calgary Zone, Calgary, AB, Canada. 
9Interdepartmental Division of Critical Care Medicine, Mount Sinai Hospital,
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 10Division of Critical Care Medicine 
and Center for Health Evaluation and Outcome Sciences, St. Paul's Hospital and
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. 11Interdepartmental
Division of Critical Care, St Michael's Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto,
ON, Canada. 12Department of Critical Care Medicine, Queens University, Kingston, 
ON, Canada. 13Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine and
Population Health and Optimal Health Practices Research Unit, CHU de Québec
Research Center, Université Laval, Québec City, QC, Canada. 14Interdepartmental
Division of Critical Care Medicine, Sunnybrook Hospital, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada.

Comment in
    Crit Care Med. 2015 Jul;43(7):1526-7.
    Crit Care Med. 2015 Jul;43(7):1527-8.
    Crit Care Med. 2015 Dec;43(12):e600-1.

OBJECTIVE: Very elderly persons admitted to ICUs are at high risk of death. To
document life-sustaining interventions (mechanical ventilation, vasopressors,
renal replacement therapy) provided in the ICU and outcomes of care.
DESIGN: Multicenter, prospective cohort study.
SETTING: ICUs of 24 Canadian hospitals.
PARTICIPANTS/SETTING: Patients 80 years old or older admitted to the ICU.
INTERVENTIONS: None.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: One thousand six hundred seventy-one patients were
included. The average age of the cohort was 85 years (range, 80-100 yr). Median
total length of stay in ICU was 4 days (interquartile range, 2-8 d) and in
hospital was 17 days (interquartile range, 8-33 d). Of all patients included, 502
(30%) stayed in ICU for 7 days or more and 344 (21%) received some form of
life-sustaining treatment for at least 7 days. ICU and hospital mortality were
22% and 35%, respectively. For nonsurvivors, the median time from ICU admission
to death was 10 days (interquartile range, 3-20 d). Of those who died (n = 5 85),
289 (49%) died while receiving mechanical ventilation, vasopressors, or dialysis.
The presence of frailty or advance directives had little impact on limiting use
of life-sustaining treatments or shortening the time from admission to death.
CONCLUSIONS: In this multicenter study, one third of very elderly ICU patients
died in hospital, many after a prolonged ICU stay while continuing to receive
aggressive life-sustaining interventions. These findings raise questions about
the use of critical care at the end of life for the very elderly.

DOI: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000001024 
PMID: 25901550  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Vnitr Lek. 2015 Apr;61(4):321-7.

[Treatment of elderly diabetic patients].

[Article in Czech]

Rušavý Z, Žourek M.

Type 2 diabetes has become a pandemic disease over the past 50 years. Its
incidence increases the most rapidly in the senior population, i.e. among people 
older than 65. In a number of countries 1/4 of the people with diabetes are now
older than 65 years. Geriatrics now examines numerous differences regarding the
senior patients, which often lead to somewhat different therapeutic procedures as
compared to the treatment of other adult patients. This paper aims to show some
different aspects of the treatment of an elderly patient with diabetes. The
intensity of diabetes treatment in the elderly is mainly defined by the incidence
of symptoms caused by diabetic decompensation which negatively affect quality of 
life and are likely to increase mortality. The treatment goals expressed by
HbA1c, fasting and post-prandial glycemia, should be set individually based on
age, initial HbA1c, present comorbidities and the level of frailty of an elderly 
patient. An effort to reduce weight regarding people at an older age is probably 
inappropriate and maybe even harmful, while physical activity reduces mortality
and slows muscle catabolism at every age. Ideal is normal walking for 20-30
minutes a day. Except for "very fit elders" without renal insufficiency, the
sulfonylurea treatment is unsuitable and perhaps even harmful. It significantly
increases the incidence of different types of hypoglycemia and very likely
overall mortality as well. The basis of diabetes treatment for the elderly is the
effort to perform any regular exercise. In regard to medication treatment it is
recommended to choose metformin or gliptin following the rule "start low, go
slow", i.e. start with low medication doses and increase them at a slow pace. The
main goal of the treatment is to maintain the good quality of life as long as
possible, without symptoms associated with hyperglycemia with minimizing the risk
of hypoglycemia development.


PMID: 25894262  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens. 2015 May;24(3):268-75. doi:
10.1097/MNH.0000000000000120.

Body composition in chronic kidney disease.

Johansen KL(1), Lee C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, University of California, San Francisco, California,
USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To summarize the latest information on body composition among 
patients with chronic kidney disease and its association with outcomes.
RECENT FINDINGS: Obesity is increasing among patients with end-stage renal
disease and is more prevalent when direct measures of adiposity are used rather
than BMI. High BMI is not associated with better survival among patients with
earlier chronic kidney disease or after kidney transplantation, suggesting that
excess fat is most protective among the sickest patients. Despite the positive
association between BMI and survival among patients with end-stage renal disease,
visceral fat is associated with coronary artery calcification and adverse
cardiovascular events. Muscle wasting is prominent among patients with chronic
kidney disease, sometimes even in the setting of obesity. Obesity and muscle
wasting are associated with worse physical functioning. Indicators of low muscle 
size and strength are associated with higher mortality. Some interventions can
affect body composition, but whether they affect survival has not been
determined.
SUMMARY: Recent studies show that a high BMI is not protective for all patients
with chronic kidney disease and is associated with poor physical functioning and 
frailty. Visceral adiposity is associated with adverse cardiovascular outcomes.
Sarcopenia is common among patients with end-stage renal disease and is
associated with worse physical performance and higher mortality.

DOI: 10.1097/MNH.0000000000000120 
PMCID: PMC4778545
PMID: 25887900  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


294. BMC Nephrol. 2015 Mar 21;16:32. doi: 10.1186/s12882-015-0021-9.

Underreporting of nursing home utilization on the CMS-2728 in older incident
dialysis patients and implications for assessing mortality risk.

Bowling CB(1)(2), Zhang R(3)(4), Franch H(5)(6), Huang Y(7)(8), Mirk A(9)(10),
McClellan WM(11), Johnson TM 2nd(12)(13), Kutner NG(14).

Author information: 
(1)Birmingham/Atlanta Geriatric Research, Education, and Clinical Center, Atlanta
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 1670 Clairmont Road (11B), Decatur, GA, 30033,
USA. cbbowli@emory.edu.
(2)Division of General Medicine and Geriatrics, Department of Medicine, Emory
University, Atlanta, GA, USA. cbbowli@emory.edu.
(3)United States Renal Data System, Rehabilitation/Quality of Life Special
Studies Center, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA. hzang3@emory.edu.
(4)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Emory University, Atlanta, GA,
USA. hzang3@emory.edu.
(5)Division of Renal Medicine, Department of Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta,
GA, USA. hfranch@emory.edu.
(6)Subspecialty Service Line, Atlanta Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Decatur,
GA, USA. hfranch@emory.edu.
(7)United States Renal Data System, Rehabilitation/Quality of Life Special
Studies Center, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA. yhuang5@emory.edu.
(8)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Emory University, Atlanta, GA,
USA. yhuang5@emory.edu.
(9)Birmingham/Atlanta Geriatric Research, Education, and Clinical Center, Atlanta
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 1670 Clairmont Road (11B), Decatur, GA, 30033,
USA. anna.mirk@va.gov.
(10)Division of General Medicine and Geriatrics, Department of Medicine, Emory
University, Atlanta, GA, USA. anna.mirk@va.gov.
(11)Departments of Medicine and Epidemiology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA.
wmcclel@emory.edu.
(12)Birmingham/Atlanta Geriatric Research, Education, and Clinical Center,
Atlanta Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 1670 Clairmont Road (11B), Decatur, GA, 
30033, USA. tmjohns@emory.edu.
(13)Division of General Medicine and Geriatrics, Department of Medicine, Emory
University, Atlanta, GA, USA. tmjohns@emory.edu.
(14)United States Renal Data System, Rehabilitation/Quality of Life Special
Studies Center, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA. nkutner@emory.edu.

BACKGROUND: The usage of nursing home (NH) services is a marker of frailty among 
older adults. Although the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) revised
the Medical Evidence Report Form CMS-2728 in 2005 to include data collection on
NH institutionalization, the validity of this item has not been reported.
METHODS: There were 27,913 patients ≥ 75 years of age with incident end-stage
renal disease (ESRD) in 2006, which constituted our analysis cohort. We
determined the accuracy of the CMS-2728 using a matched cohort that included the 
CMS Minimum Data Set (MDS) 2.0, often employed as a "gold standard" metric for
identifying patients receiving NH care. We calculated sensitivity, specificity,
positive predictive value (PPV), and negative predictive value (NPV) for the
CMS-2728 NH item. Next, we compared characteristics and mortality risk by
CMS-2728 and MDS NH status agreement.
RESULTS: The sensitivity, specificity, PPV and NPV of the CMS-2728 for NH status 
were 33%, 97%, 80% and 79%, respectively. Compared to those without the MDS or
CMS-2728 NH indicator (No MDS/No 2728), multivariable adjusted hazard ratios (95%
confidence interval) for mortality associated with NH status were 1.55 (1.46 -
1.64) for MDS/2728, 1.48 (1.42 - 1.54) for MDS/No 2728, and 1.38 (1.25 - 1.52)
for No MDS/2728. NH utilization was more strongly associated with mortality than 
other CMS-2728 items in the model.
CONCLUSIONS: The CMS-2728 underestimated NH utilization among older adults with
incident ESRD. The potential for misclassification may have important
ramifications for assessing prognosis, developing advanced care plans and
providing coordinated care.

DOI: 10.1186/s12882-015-0021-9 
PMCID: PMC4408561
PMID: 25880589  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Am J Epidemiol. 2015 Jul 1;182(1):17-25. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwu485. Epub 2015 Apr
12.

Controlling Time-Dependent Confounding by Health Status and Frailty: Restriction 
Versus Statistical Adjustment.

McGrath LJ, Ellis AR, Brookhart MA.

Nonexperimental studies of preventive interventions are often biased because of
the healthy-user effect and, in frail populations, because of confounding by
functional status. Bias is evident when estimating influenza vaccine
effectiveness, even after adjustment for claims-based indicators of illness. We
explored bias reduction methods while estimating vaccine effectiveness in a
cohort of adult hemodialysis patients. Using the United States Renal Data System 
and linked data from a commercial dialysis provider, we estimated vaccine
effectiveness using a Cox proportional hazards marginal structural model of
all-cause mortality before and during 3 influenza seasons in 2005/2006 through
2007/2008. To improve confounding control, we added frailty indicators to the
model, measured time-varying confounders at different time intervals, and
restricted the sample in multiple ways. Crude and baseline-adjusted marginal
structural models remained strongly biased. Restricting to a healthier population
removed some unmeasured confounding; however, this reduced the sample size,
resulting in wide confidence intervals. We estimated an influenza vaccine
effectiveness of 9% (hazard ratio = 0.91, 95% confidence interval: 0.72, 1.15)
when bias was minimized through cohort restriction. In this study, the
healthy-user bias could not be controlled through statistical adjustment;
however, sample restriction reduced much of the bias.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Johns
Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. All rights reserved. For permissions, 
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/aje/kwu485 
PMCID: PMC4479111
PMID: 25868551  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Clin Kidney J. 2014 Jun;7(3):257-63. doi: 10.1093/ckj/sfu034. Epub 2014 Apr 15.

Falls among hemodialysis patients: potential opportunities for prevention?

Kutner NG(1), Zhang R(1), Huang Y(1), Wasse H(2).

Author information: 
(1)United States Renal Data System , Rehabilitation/Quality of Life Special
Studies Center , Emory University , Atlanta, GA , USA.
(2)United States Renal Data System , Rehabilitation/Quality of Life Special
Studies Center , Emory University , Atlanta, GA , USA ; Division of Nephrology , 
School of Medicine, Emory University , Atlanta, GA , USA.

BACKGROUND: Falls among patients undergoing maintenance hemodialysis (HD) have
significant consequences for quality of life and functional independence,
morbidity, healthcare utilization and even mortality, but studies on the etiology
of falls within large HD cohorts are limited.
METHODS: Falls during the past 12 months were ascertained for a prevalent
multi-center HD cohort (n = 762) aged 20-92 years, and associations with
demographic and treatment characteristics, comorbidities, cognitive function,
prescribed medications, balance tests, frailty and depressive symptoms were
assessed.
RESULTS: Falls were sustained by 28.4% of participants. In multivariable-adjusted
analyses, participants classified as frail were over two times more likely to
report falls [odds ratio (OR): 2.39, 95% confidence interval (CI): 1.22-4.71, P =
0.01], and participants with a CES-D score 18+ and/or prescribed antidepressants 
were over 80% more likely to be fallers (OR: 1.83, 95% CI: 1.23-2.74, P = 0.003) 
than were participants with a CES-D score <18 and no prescribed antidepressants.
CONCLUSIONS: Frailty and depressed mood, factors that are potentially modifiable,
are prominently associated with falls.

DOI: 10.1093/ckj/sfu034 
PMCID: PMC4377754
PMID: 25852886 


297. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care. 2015 May;18(3):254-62. doi:
10.1097/MCO.0000000000000171.

Latest consensus and update on protein-energy wasting in chronic kidney disease.

Obi Y(1), Qader H, Kovesdy CP, Kalantar-Zadeh K.

Author information: 
(1)aDivision of Nephrology and Hypertension bHarold Simmons Center for Kidney
Disease Research and Epidemiology, University of California Irvine, Orange,
California cUniversity of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, Tennessee,
USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Protein-energy wasting (PEW) is a state of metabolic and
nutritional derangements in chronic disease states including chronic kidney
disease (CKD). Cumulative evidence suggests that PEW, muscle wasting and cachexia
are common and strongly associated with mortality in CKD, which is reviewed here.
RECENT FINDINGS: The malnutrition-inflammation score (KALANTAR Score) is among
the comprehensive and outcome-predicting nutritional scoring tools. The
association of obesity with poor outcomes is attenuated across more advanced CKD 
stages and eventually reverses in the form of obesity paradox. Frailty is closely
associated with PEW, muscle wasting and cachexia. Muscle loss shows stronger
associations with unfavorable outcomes than fat loss. Adequate energy
supplementation combined with low-protein diet for the management of CKD may
prevent the development of PEW and can improve adherence to low-protein diet, but
dietary protein requirement may increase with aging and is higher under dialysis 
therapy. Phosphorus burden may lead to poor outcomes. The target serum
bicarbonate concentration is normal range and at least 23 mEq/l for
nondialysis-dependent and dialysis-dependent CKD patients, respectively. A
benefit of exercise is suggested but not yet conclusively proven.
SUMMARY: Prevention and treatment of PEW should involve individualized and
integrated approaches to modulate identified risk factors and contributing
comorbidities.

DOI: 10.1097/MCO.0000000000000171 
PMCID: PMC4506466
PMID: 25807354  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Clin Exp Nephrol. 2015 Dec;19(6):1165-78. doi: 10.1007/s10157-015-1108-0. Epub
2015 Mar 19.

Variability of laboratory parameters is associated with frailty markers and
predicts non-cardiac mortality in hemodialysis patients.

Nakazato Y(1), Kurane R(2), Hirose S(2), Watanabe A(2), Shimoyama H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Hakuyukai Medical Corporation, Yuai Nisshin Clinic,
2-1914-6 Nisshin-cho, Kita-ku, Saitama-City, Saitama, 331-0823, Japan.
nkzt@hakuyukai.jp.
(2)Division of Nephrology, Hakuyukai Medical Corporation, Yuai Nisshin Clinic,
2-1914-6 Nisshin-cho, Kita-ku, Saitama-City, Saitama, 331-0823, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The levels of many laboratory parameters are associated with the
outcomes of dialysis patients, but the significance of their variability has not 
been well studied.
METHODS: A total of 384 patients receiving stable hemodialysis treatment during
2002 were followed up for mortality until the end of 2013. The within-patient
coefficients of variation (CV) were calculated for 13 laboratory parameters from 
1 year of data. We defined variability as CV and analyzed the survival of the
patients according to the baseline CV values of each parameter by proportional
hazard modeling.
RESULTS: During the 11-year observation period, 125 patients died. Higher CV
levels for eight parameters, namely, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), sodium,
hemoglobin, creatinine, total protein, albumin, potassium and phosphate, were
significantly associated with all-cause mortality. The adjusted hazard ratios for
a high BUN-CV (>15 %) and a high Na-CV (>1.3 %) against a lower CV were 1.92 (95 
% CI 1.31-2.81) and 1.95 (1.36-2.80), respectively. The increased mortality risk 
associated with each variability was attributed to excess non-cardiac deaths. The
CV values of most parameters were correlated with each other and often exhibited 
negative associations with age, diabetes, and mobility as well as the levels of
hemoglobin, albumin, creatinine, Na, the protein catabolic rate, and the
creatinine generation rate. Therefore, a high variability was generally
associated with frailty-related adverse prognostic factors.
CONCLUSIONS: The variability of several blood parameters had a significant impact
on all-cause and non-cardiac mortality. The levels of the variabilities were most
likely related to poor physical conditions of the patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s10157-015-1108-0 
PMID: 25788369  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Curr Opin Gastroenterol. 2015 May;31(3):224-32. doi:
10.1097/MOG.0000000000000173.

Update on the management of the liver transplant patient.

Kwong AJ(1), Fix OK.

Author information: 
(1)aDepartment of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, California
bOrgan Transplant Department, Swedish Medical Center, Seattle, Washington, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To review and highlight recent literature regarding the
medical management of adult patients undergoing liver transplantation.
RECENT FINDINGS: The addition of serum sodium concentration to the model for
end-stage liver disease (MELD) score more accurately predicts 90-day waitlist
mortality. Predictors of waitlist mortality and posttransplant survival include
lower albumin and the presence of ascites, varices, and encephalopathy, as well
as more nontraditional predictors such as older age, obesity, frailty, and
sarcopenia. Indications for liver transplantation are evolving with the advent of
effective therapy for hepatitis C and the increased prevalence of nonalcoholic
steatohepatitis. Disparities persist in the current allocation system, including 
geographic variation and MELD inflation for hepatocellular carcinoma. Share 35
allows for broader regional sharing of organs for patients with the highest need,
without detrimental effects on waitlist mortality or survival. Everolimus is a
recently approved option for posttransplant immunosuppression that spares renal
function.
SUMMARY: The MELD score has enabled the liver transplant community to equitably
allocate organs. Recent literature has focused on the limitations of the MELD
score and the disparities inherent in the current system. The next steps for
liver transplantation will be to develop strategies to further optimize waitlist 
prioritization and organ allocation.

DOI: 10.1097/MOG.0000000000000173 
PMID: 25774445  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Am J Transplant. 2015 Apr;15(4):1050-60. doi: 10.1111/ajt.13095. Epub 2015 Mar
10.

Individual and regional factors of access to the renal transplant waiting list in
france in a cohort of dialyzed patients.

Bayat S(1), Macher MA, Couchoud C, Bayer F, Lassalle M, Villar E, Caillé Y,
Mercier S, Joyeux V, Noel C, Kessler M, Jacquelinet C; REIN registry.

Author information: 
(1)Département d'Epidémiologie-Biostatistiques, EA MOS, EHESP, Rennes, France.

Several studies have investigated geographical variations in access to renal
transplant waiting lists, but none has assessed the impact on these variations of
factors at both the patient and geographic levels. The objective of our study was
to identify medical and non-medical factors at both these levels associated with 
these geographical variations in waiting-list placement in France. We included
all incident patients aged 18-80 years in 11 French regions who started dialysis 
between January 1, 2006, and December 31, 2008. Both a multilevel Cox model with 
shared frailty and a competing risks model were used for the analyses. At the
patient level, old age, comorbidities, diabetic nephropathy, non-autonomous first
dialysis, and female gender were the major determinants of a lower probability of
being waitlisted. At the regional level, the only factor associated with this
probability was an increase in the number of patients on the waiting list from
2005 to 2009. This finding supports a slight but significant impact of a regional
organ shortage on waitlisting practices. Our findings demonstrate that patients' 
age has a major impact on waitlisting practices, even for patients with no
comorbidity or disability, whose survival would likely be improved by
transplantation compared with dialysis.

© Copyright 2015 The American Society of Transplantation and the American Society
of Transplant Surgeons.

DOI: 10.1111/ajt.13095 
PMID: 25758788  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2015 May 7;10(5):832-40. doi: 10.2215/CJN.07760814. Epub
2015 Mar 4.

Frailty and mortality in dialysis: evaluation of a clinical frailty scale.

Alfaadhel TA(1), Soroka SD(1), Kiberd BA(1), Landry D(1), Moorhouse P(2),
Tennankore KK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Nephrology and.
(2)Geriatric Medicine, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
(3)Divisions of Nephrology and ktennankore@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Frailty is associated with poor outcomes for patients 
on dialysis; however, previous studies have not taken into account the severity
of frailty as a predictor of outcomes. The purpose of this study was to assess if
there was an association between the degree of frailty and mortality among
patients on incident dialysis.
DESIGN, SETTING, PARTICIPANTS, & MEASUREMENTS: A cohort study of incident chronic
dialysis patients was conducted between January of 2009 and June of 2013 (last
follow-up in December of 2013). On the basis of overall clinical impression, the 
Clinical Frailty Scale (CFS) score was determined for patients at the start of
dialysis by their primary nephrologist. This simple scale allocates a single
point to different states of frailty (1, very fit; 2, well; 3, managing well; 4, 
vulnerable; 5, mildly frail; 6, moderately frail; 7, severely frail or terminally
ill) with an emphasis on function of the assessed individual. The primary outcome
was time to death. Patients were censored at the time of transplantation.
RESULTS: The cohort consisted of 390 patients with completed CFS scores (mean age
of 63±15 years old). Most were Caucasian (89%) and men (67%), and 30% of patients
had ESRD caused by diabetic nephropathy. The median Charlson Comorbidity Index
score was 4 (interquartile range =3-6), and the median CFS score was 4
(interquartile range =2-5). There were 96 deaths over 750 patient-years at risk. 
In an adjusted Cox survival analysis, the hazard ratio associated with each
1-point increase in the CFS was 1.22 (95% confidence interval, 1.04 to 1.43;
P=0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: A higher severity of frailty (as defined by the CFS) at dialysis
initiation is associated with higher mortality.

Copyright © 2015 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.2215/CJN.07760814 
PMCID: PMC4422241
PMID: 25739851  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


302. World J Nephrol. 2015 Feb 6;4(1):19-30. doi: 10.5527/wjn.v4.i1.19.

Aging and uremia: Is there cellular and molecular crossover?

White WE(1), Yaqoob MM(1), Harwood SM(1).

Author information: 
(1)William E White, Muhammad M Yaqoob, Steven M Harwood, Queen Mary University of
London, Translational Medicine and Therapeutics, William Harvey Research
Institute, John Vane Science Centre, EC1M 6BQ London, United Kingdom.

Many observers have noted that the morphological changes that occur in chronic
kidney disease (CKD) patients resemble those seen in the geriatric population,
with strikingly similar morbidity and mortality profiles and rates of frailty in 
the two groups, and shared characteristics at a pathophysiological level
especially in respect to the changes seen in their vascular and immune systems.
However, whilst much has been documented about the shared physical
characteristics of aging and uremia, the molecular and cellular similarities
between the two have received less attention. In order to bridge this perceived
gap we have reviewed published research concerning the common molecular processes
seen in aging subjects and CKD patients, with specific attention to altered
proteostasis, mitochondrial dysfunction, post-translational protein modification,
and senescence and telomere attrition. We have also sought to illustrate how the 
cell death and survival pathways apoptosis, necroptosis and autophagy are closely
interrelated, and how an understanding of these overlapping pathways is helpful
in order to appreciate the shared molecular basis behind the pathophysiology of
aging and uremia. This analysis revealed many common molecular characteristics
and showed similar patterns of cellular dysfunction. We conclude that the
accelerated aging seen in patients with CKD is underpinned at the molecular
level, and that a greater understanding of these molecular processes might
eventually lead to new much needed therapeutic strategies of benefit to patients 
with renal disease.

DOI: 10.5527/wjn.v4.i1.19 
PMCID: PMC4317625
PMID: 25664244 


303. Blood Purif. 2015;39(1-3):50-4. doi: 10.1159/000368952. Epub 2015 Jan 20.

The concept of frailty in geriatric chronic kidney disease (CKD) patients.

Lam M(1), Jassal SV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
B.C., Canada.

Frailty, which is a geriatric syndrome characterized by weakness, impaired
mobility, balance, and minimal reserve, is highly prevalent in the renal
population. While distinct from disability and comorbidity, some of the simplest 
and most clinically useful scales incorporate both the burden of medical symptoms
and the effect on functional independence into the evaluation of frailty. In the 
renal population, the frailty phenotype has been shown to correlate with
important outcomes such as hospitalization and survival. Further work is required
to establish if the presence of, and the treatments used for renal disease,
promote the sick role and decreased participation in exercise with overestimation
of frailty or if the frailty phenotype identifies people who may benefit from
rehabilitation and other interventions.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000368952 
PMID: 25661193  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Int J Mol Med. 2015 Apr;35(4):925-31. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2015.2090. Epub 2015 Feb 
4.

Effect of bombesin receptor subtype-3 and its synthetic agonist on signaling,
glucose transport and metabolism in myocytes from patients with obesity and type 
2 diabetes.

González N(1), Martín-Duce A(2), Martínez-Arrieta F(3), Moreno-Villegas Z(4),
Portal-Núñez S(5), Sanz R(6), Egido J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Renal, Vascular and Diabetes Research Laboratory, IIS-Jiménez Díaz Foundation,
The Autonomous University of Madrid, Spanish Biomedical Research Network in
Diabetes and Associated Metabolic Disorders (CIBERDEM), Madrid, Spain.
(2)Department of Nursery, Unit of Surgery, Alcalá University, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Department of General Surgery, Puerta de Hierro-Majadahonda University
Hospital, The Autonomous University of Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Renal, Vascular and Diabetes Research Laboratory, IIS-Jiménez Díaz Foundation,
The Autonomous University of Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(5)Department of Bone and Mineral Metabolism, IIS-Jiménez Díaz Foundation,
Cooperative Research Thematic Network on Aging and Frailty (RETICEF), Madrid,
Spain.
(6)Department of Neurology, IIS-Jiménez Díaz Foundation, Madrid, Spain.

Bombesin receptor subtype-3 (BRS-3) is an orphan G-protein-coupled receptor
(GPCR) member of the bombesin receptor family. Several studies have suggested an 
association between obesity, alterations in glucose metabolism, diabetes and the 
BRS-3 receptor. In this study, we focused on patients simultaneously diagnosed
with obesity and type 2 diabetes (OB/T2D). The analysis of BRS-3 expression in
the skeletal muscle of these patients revealed a marked decrease in the
expression of BRS-3 at the mRNA (23.6 ± 1.3-fold downregulation, p<0.0001) and
protein level (49 ± 7% decrease, p<0.05) compared to the normal patients (no
obesity and diabetes). Moreover, in cultured primary myocytes from patients with 
OB/T2D, the synthetic BRS-3 agonist, [D-Try6,β-Ala11,Phe13,Nle14]bombesin6-14,
significantly increased the phosphorylation levels of mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK), p90RSK1, protein kinase B (PKB) and p70s6K. Specifically, the
ligand at 10-11 M induced the maximal phosphorylation of MAPKs (p42, 159 ± 15% of
the control; p44, 166 ± 11% of the control; p<0.0001) and p90RSK1 (148 ± 2% of
the control, p<0.0001). The basal phosphorylation levels of all kinases were
reduced (p<0.05) in the patients with OB/T2D compared to the normal patients.
Furthermore, the BRS-3 agonist stimulated glucose transport, which was already
detected at 10-12 M (133 ± 9% of the control), reached maximal levels at 10-11 M 
(160 ± 9%, p<0.0001) and was maintained at up to 10-8 M (overall mean, 153 ± 7%; 
p < 0.007). This effect was less promiment than that attained with 10-8 M insulin
(202 ± 9%, p = 0.009). The effect of the agonist on glycogen synthase a activity 
achieved the maximum effect at 10-11 M (165 ± 16% of the control; p<0.0001),
which did not differ from that observed with higher concentrations of the
agonist. These results suggest that muscle cells isolated from patients with
OB/T2D have extremely high sensitivity to the synthetic ligand, and the effects
are particularly observed on MAPK and p90RSK1 phosphorylation, as well as glucose
uptake. Moreover, our data indicate that BRS-3 may prove to be useful as a
potential therapeutic target for the treatment of patients with OB/T2D.

DOI: 10.3892/ijmm.2015.2090 
PMCID: PMC4356436
PMID: 25653074  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Nephrology (Carlton). 2015 May;20(5):321-8. doi: 10.1111/nep.12401.

Simple self-report FRAIL scale might be more closely associated with dialysis
complications than other frailty screening instruments in rural chronic dialysis 
patients.

Chao CT(1), Hsu YH, Chang PY, He YT, Ueng RS, Lai CF, Chiang CK, Huang JW, Huang 
SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital Jin-Shan Branch,
New Taipei City, Taiwan; Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine,
Taipei, Taiwan.

Comment in
    Nephrology (Carlton). 2016 Apr;21(4):344-5.

AIM: Despite the perceived importance of frailty, few studies focus on its impact
on rural patients undergoing chronic dialysis. Comparison of different
self-report questionnaires in assessing frailty among these patients has not been
attempted before.
METHODS: A prospectively enrolled chronic dialysis cohort from a rural centre was
recruited for analysis. Six types of self-report questionnaires were administered
to these patients. Clinical and dialysis-related laboratory parameters were
collected. Correlation analyses between questionnaire results and dialysis
complications were performed, and variables demonstrating significant
correlations were entered into multivariate regression models to determine their 
independent associations.
RESULTS: Six types of questionnaire (Strawbridge questionnaire, Edmonton Frail
Scale, simple FRAIL scale, Groningen Frail Indicator, G8 questionnaire, and
Tilburg Frail Indicator) were provided to rural patients undergoing chronic
dialysis. Scores from each questionnaire showed significant association with each
other, except the G8 questionnaire. Scores from the simple FRAIL scale correlated
significantly with age (P = 0.02), female gender (P = 0.03), higher Liu's
comorbidity index (P = 0.02), lower serum albumin (P = 0.03) and creatinine
levels (P < 0.01), and higher ferritin levels (P = 0.02). The other five
questionnaires did not show consistently significant relationships with important
dialysis-related complications. Multivariate linear regression analysis
identified an independently negative association between serum albumin and the
simple FRAIL scale results (P = 0.01).
CONCLUSION: This is the first study establishing the utility of different
self-report questionnaires for assessing frailty in chronic dialysis patients.
The simple FRAIL scale scores might demonstrate a closer relationship with
dialysis-related complications.

© 2015 Asian Pacific Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.1111/nep.12401 
PMID: 25597434  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Geriatr Cardiol. 2014 Dec;11(4):329-37. doi:
10.11909/j.issn.1671-5411.2014.04.008.

Management of chronic heart failure in the older population.

Azad N(1), Lemay G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ottawa Hospital, Civic Campus Geriatric Assessment Unit 1053, Carling Avenue, 
Box 678 Ottawa, ON K1Y 4E9, Canada.

Chronic heart failure (CHF) is the leading cause of hospitalization for those
over the age of 65 and represents a significant clinical and economic burden.
About half of hospital re-admissions are related to co-morbidities, polypharmacy 
and disabilities associated with CHF. Moreover, CHF also has an enormous cost in 
terms of poor prognosis with an average one year mortality of 33%-35%. While more
than half of patients with CHF are over 75 years, most clinical trials have
included younger patients with a mean age of 61 years. Inadequate data makes
treatment decisions challenging for the providers. Older CHF patients are more
often female, have less cardiovascular diseases and associated risk factors, but 
higher rates of non-cardiovascular conditions and diastolic dysfunction. The
prevalence of CHF with reduced ejection fraction, ischemic heart disease, and its
risk factors declines with age, whereas the prevalence of non-cardiac
co-morbidities, such as chronic renal failure, dementia, anemia and malignancy
increases with age. Diabetes and hypertension are among the strongest risk
factors as predictors of CHF particularly among women with coronary heart
disease. This review paper will focus on the specific consideration for CHF
assessment in the older population. Management strategies will be reviewed,
including non-pharmacologic, pharmacologic, quality care indicators, quality
improvement in care transition and lastly, end-of-life issues. Palliative care
should be an integral part of an interdisciplinary team approach for a
comprehensive care plan over the whole disease trajectory. In addition, frailty
contributes valuable prognostic insight incremental to existing risk models and
assists clinicians in defining optimal care pathways for their patients.

DOI: 10.11909/j.issn.1671-5411.2014.04.008 
PMCID: PMC4292097
PMID: 25593582 


307. J Vasc Surg Venous Lymphat Disord. 2015 Jan;3(1):58-63. doi:
10.1016/j.jvsv.2014.08.001. Epub 2014 Oct 3.

Utility of iliac vein stenting in elderly population older than 80 years.

Raju S(1), Ward M(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Rane Center at St. Dominic's Hospital, Jackson, Miss. Electronic address: 
rajumd@earthlink.net.
(2)The Rane Center at St. Dominic's Hospital, Jackson, Miss.

BACKGROUND: The geriatric population aged 80 years and older with severe
manifestations of chronic venous disease face diminishing therapeutic options.
Self-applied compression is often not possible because of frailty or arthritis.
Significant limb swelling diminishes mobility, affects independent living, and
precipitates institutionalization. Limb ulceration and pain diminish quality of
life at a time when it is paramount. Cellulitis uniquely poses septicemic risk in
this age group. Family caregivers are often able to continue home care if the
intensity of care can be reduced. Iliac vein stenting may have a role as it
appears to be safe and effective in this advanced stage of life.
METHODS: Patients who had failed to respond to compression and desired palliation
of continuing severe chronic venous disease symptoms were considered for iliac
vein stenting. Intravascular ultrasound-guided stenting was carried out under
fluoroscopy without venography in case of allergy to contrast material or
decreased renal function. General anesthesia was used for better cardiopulmonary 
control.
RESULTS: A total of 107 limbs (12 bilateral) were treated with iliac vein stents 
during a 13-year period, representing 5% of all stented limbs. Median age was 83 
years (80-96 years), and 10 were ≥ 90 years; 59% were post-thrombotic. Clinical, 
etiologic, anatomic, and pathologic classification was as follows: C2 (with
pain), 3%; C3, 32%; C4, 33%; C5, 5%; and C6, 27%. Concurrent saphenous ablation
was carried out in 28% when saphenous reflux was considered ancillary and not the
main disease. There was no mortality. Reintervention was required in 20% of limbs
for nonocclusive stent malfunction; 2% of stents occluded. Primary and
primary-assisted duplex patency rates at 5 years were 52% and 90%, respectively. 
The visual analog scale score of pain improved from median 4 (0-9) to 0 (0-10)
after stenting (P < .0001). Pain was completely relieved in 43% of limbs.
Cumulative improvement in the pain score of at least 3 points was 71% at 6 years.
Swelling (grade 0, none; grade 1, pitting; grade 2, ankle edema; grade 3, gross) 
improved from median 3 (0-3) to 1 (0-3) (P < .0001). Swelling completely resolved
in 25% of limbs. Cumulative improvement of at least one grade of swelling
(examination) was 63% at 6 years; 70% of limbs (n = 33) with prior cellulitis
were relieved of recurrence after stent placement; 61% of active ulcers healed,
and 37% of patients were able to discard stockings (P < .001).
CONCLUSIONS: Iliac vein stenting appears to offer a safe and effective option in 
octogenarians and nonagenarians when compression fails, is difficult, or is
impossible.

Copyright © 2015 Society for Vascular Surgery. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jvsv.2014.08.001 
PMID: 26993682  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


308. J Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. 2014;2(2). pii: 1031.

Frailty Attenuates the Impact of Metformin on Reducing Mortality in Older Adults 
with Type 2 Diabetes.

Wang CP(1), Lorenzo C(2), Espinoza SE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, University of Texas Health Science
Center at San Antonio, USA ; Audie L Murphy Veterans Hospital, South Texas
Veterans Health Care System, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Clinical Epidemiology, University of Texas
Health Science Center at San Antonio, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Division of Clinical Epidemiology, University of Texas
Health Science Center at San Antonio, USA ; Department of Medicine, Division of
Geriatrics, Gerontology, and Palliative Medicine, University of Texas Health
Science Center at San Antonio, USA ; Geriatric Research Education and Clinical
Center, Audie L Murphy Veterans Hospital, USA ; Barshop Institute for Longevity
and Aging Studies, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether the protective effect of metformin against death 
is modified by frailty status in older adults with type 2 diabetes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We conducted a cohort study during October 1,
1999-September 30, 2006 among veterans aged 65-89 years old with type 2 diabetes 
but without history of liver, renal diseases, or cancers, who had sulfonylureas
or metformin as the sole antidiabetic drug for ≥180 days. The Cox proportional
hazard model was used to compare hazard rates of all-cause mortality between the 
metformin and sulfonylurea users adjusting for the propensity score of metformin 
use and covariates: age, race/ethnicity, diabetes duration, Charlson comorbidity 
score, statin use, smoking status, BMI, LDL, and HbA1c.
RESULTS: In this cohort of 2,415 veterans, 307 (12.7%) were metformin users,
2,108 (87.3%) were sulfonylurea users, the mean age was 73.7±5.2 years, the mean 
study period was 5.6±2.3 years, the mean HbA1c at baseline was 6.7±1.0%, 23% had 
diabetes for ≥10 years, and 43.6% (N=1,048) died during the study period. For
patients with and without frailty, the adjusted hazard ratio (HR) of death for
metformin vs. sulfonylurea use were 0.92 (95% CI=0.90-1.31, p-value=0.19) and
0.69 (95% CI = 0.60-0.79, p-value<0.001), respectively. Logistic regression
analyses showed that metformin (vs. sulfonylurea) was significantly associated
with a decreased odds of frailty (OR: 0.66, 95% CI: 0.61-0.71, p-value <.0001).
CONCLUSION: Our study suggests that metformin could potentially promote longevity
via preventing frailty in older adults with type 2 diabetes.


PMCID: PMC4264048
PMID: 25506599 


309. Front Physiol. 2014 Nov 24;5:439. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2014.00439. eCollection
2014.

The impact of age-related dysregulation of the angiotensin system on
mitochondrial redox balance.

Vajapey R(1), Rini D(2), Walston J(3), Abadir P(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Northeast Ohio Medical University Rootstown, OH, USA.
(2)Division of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Art as Applied to Medicine, Johns
Hopkins University Baltimore, MD, USA.
(3)Division of Geriatrics Medicine and Gerontology, Department of Medicine, Johns
Hopkins University Baltimore, MD, USA.

Aging is associated with the accumulation of various deleterious changes in
cells. According to the free radical and mitochondrial theory of aging,
mitochondria initiate most of the deleterious changes in aging and govern life
span. The failure of mitochondrial reduction-oxidation (redox) homeostasis and
the formation of excessive free radicals are tightly linked to dysregulation in
the Renin Angiotensin System (RAS). A main rate-controlling step in RAS is renin,
an enzyme that hydrolyzes angiotensinogen to generate angiotensin I. Angiotensin 
I is further converted to Angiotensin II (Ang II) by angiotensin-converting
enzyme (ACE). Ang II binds with equal affinity to two main angiotensin
receptors-type 1 (AT1R) and type 2 (AT2R). The binding of Ang II to AT1R
activates NADPH oxidase, which leads to increased generation of cytoplasmic
reactive oxygen species (ROS). This Ang II-AT1R-NADPH-ROS signal triggers the
opening of mitochondrial KATP channels and mitochondrial ROS production in a
positive feedback loop. Furthermore, RAS has been implicated in the decrease of
many of ROS scavenging enzymes, thereby leading to detrimental levels of free
radicals in the cell. AT2R is less understood, but evidence supports an
anti-oxidative and mitochondria-protective function for AT2R. The overlap between
age related changes in RAS and mitochondria, and the consequences of this overlap
on age-related diseases are quite complex. RAS dysregulation has been implicated 
in many pathological conditions due to its contribution to mitochondrial
dysfunction. Decreased age-related, renal and cardiac mitochondrial dysfunction
was seen in patients treated with angiotensin receptor blockers. The aim of this 
review is to: (a) report the most recent information elucidating the role of RAS 
in mitochondrial redox hemostasis and (b) discuss the effect of age-related
activation of RAS on generation of free radicals.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2014.00439 
PMCID: PMC4241834
PMID: 25505418 


310. Can Urol Assoc J. 2014 Nov;8(11-12):E884-7. doi: 10.5489/cuaj.2025.

Optimizing a frail elderly patient for radical cystectomy with a prehabilitation 
program.

Carli F(1), Awasthi R(1), Gillis C(1), Kassouf W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesia, McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, QC;
(2)Department of Surgery, McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, QC.

The purpose of this case report is to discuss the positive impact of a multimodal
prehabilitation program on postoperative recovery of a frail patient undergoing
radical cystectomy. An 85-year-old man with significant history for poorly
controlled type II diabetes, anemia, chronic renal failure, and glaucoma was
found to have muscle invasive urothelial carcinoma of the bladder with
hydronephrosis. He was scheduled for elective radical cystoprostatectomy and
ileal conduit diversion. He was enrolled in a multimodal prehabilitation program 
in view of his frailty (Fried score = 5), 15% body weight loss, weak grip
strength, severe depression and moderate anxiety, poor nutritional status
(patient-generated subjective global assessment [PG-SGA] = B), low functional
walking capacity (6-minute walking test [6MWT] = 210 metres, predicted 621
metres). The 4-week program included moderate aerobic and resistant exercises,
nutritional counselling with whey protein supplementation (20 g/day), and
relaxation exercises. Surgery and the postoperative period were uneventful,
although he required treatment of his hyperglycemia and hypomagnesemia. He left
the hospital on postoperative day 7 and returned home where he continued the
multimodal program for 8 weeks. Measurements of 6MWT, Health-Related Quality of
Life (SF-36), physical activity, Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS),
were conducted at baseline, before surgery and at 4 and 8 weeks after surgery.
These tests revealed a progressive remarkable improvement before surgery that
continued after surgery.

DOI: 10.5489/cuaj.2025 
PMCID: PMC4250260
PMID: 25485023 


311. Drug Saf. 2015 Jan;38(1):17-32. doi: 10.1007/s40264-014-0247-7.

Optimal glycaemic control in elderly people with type 2 diabetes: what does the
evidence say?

Mathur S(1), Zammitt NN, Frier BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes, Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK.

The global prevalence of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is rising in an ageing
population through a combination of lifestyle changes and greater longevity.
However, by excluding participants aged over 70 years, most major interventional 
trials on which current diabetes therapeutic guidelines are based have failed to 
provide specific evidence to support the prescribed management of diabetes in
elderly people. While diabetes per se has a significant impact on the elderly
person, the side effects of medications, particularly hypoglycaemia, prevent
optimisation of diabetes treatment. Hypoglycaemia is associated with significant 
morbidity, to which elderly people are often more vulnerable because of factors
such as the effects of ageing, progressive renal impairment, frailty,
polypharmacy and cognitive decline. T2DM is associated with accelerated cognitive
decline in some individuals, and recurrent severe hypoglycaemia has been
implicated as a potential contributory factor. Although the evidence for
selection of appropriate glycaemic targets in elderly patients is sparse, it is
now acknowledged that prevention of hypoglycaemia must influence
individualisation of treatment goals in this vulnerable group. This should also
be reflected by the choice of anti-diabetes agents that are initiated when diet
and lifestyle advice is ineffective. Recently developed international guidelines,
which have specifically addressed the management of diabetes in elderly people,
highlight the importance of a pragmatic management approach rather than
attempting to achieve a generic glycated haemoglobin goal and are summarised in
this article.

DOI: 10.1007/s40264-014-0247-7 
PMID: 25481812  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Heart. 2015 Apr;101(8):616-22. doi: 10.1136/heartjnl-2014-306472. Epub 2014 Dec
5.

Cardiovascular risk profile and frailty in a population-based study of older
British men.

Ramsay SE(1), Arianayagam DS(1), Whincup PH(2), Lennon LT(1), Cryer J(1),
Papacosta AO(1), Iliffe S(1), Wannamethee SG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Primary Care & Population Health, UCL, London, UK.
(2)Population Health Research Institute, St George's University of London,
London, UK.

Comment in
    Heart. 2015 Apr;101(8):582-3.

BACKGROUND: Frailty in older age is known to be associated with cardiovascular
disease (CVD) risk. However, the extent to which frailty is associated with the
CVD risk profile has been little studied. Our aim was to examine the associations
of a range of cardiovascular risk factors with frailty and to assess whether
these are independent of established CVD.
METHODS: Cross-sectional study of a socially representative sample of 1622
surviving men aged 71-92 examined in 2010-2012 across 24 British towns, from a
prospective study initiated in 1978-1980. Frailty was defined using the Fried
phenotype, including weight loss, grip strength, exhaustion, slowness and low
physical activity.
RESULTS: Among 1622 men, 303 (19%) were frail and 876 (54%) were pre-frail.
Compared with non-frail, those with frailty had a higher odds of obesity (OR
2.03, 95% CI 1.38 to 2.99), high waist circumference (OR 2.30, 95% CI 1.67 to
3.17), low high-density lipoprotein-cholesterol (HDL-C) (OR 2.28, 95% CI 1.47 to 
3.54) and hypertension (OR 1.79, 95% CI 1.27 to 2.54). Prevalence of these
factors was also higher in those with frailty (prevalence in frail vs non-frail
groups was 46% vs 31% for high waist circumference, 20% vs 11% for low HDL and
78% vs 65% for hypertension). Frail individuals had a worse cardiovascular risk
profile with an increased risk of high heart rate, poor lung function (forced
expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1)), raised white cell count (WCC), poor renal
function (low estimated glomerular filtration rate), low alanine transaminase and
low serum sodium. Some risk factors (HDL-C, hypertension, WCC, FEV1, renal
function and albumin) were also associated with being pre-frail. These
associations remained when men with prevalent CVD were excluded.
CONCLUSIONS: Frailty was associated with increased risk of a range of
cardiovascular factors (including obesity, HDL-C, hypertension, heart rate, lung 
function, renal function) in older people; these associations were independent of
established CVD.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/heartjnl-2014-306472 
PMCID: PMC4392309
PMID: 25480883  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Int Urol Nephrol. 2015 Apr;47(4):647-54. doi: 10.1007/s11255-014-0886-8. Epub
2014 Dec 5.

Therapeutic alternatives and palliative care for advanced renal disease in the
very elderly: a review of the literature.

Musso CG(1), Trigka K, Dousdampanis P, Jauregui J.

Author information: 
(1)Ageing Biology Unit, Hospital Italiano de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires,
Argentina, carlos.musso@hospitalitaliano.org.ar.

The overall number of very elderly patients (>79 years of age) requiring renal
replacement therapy is rising in the Western societies, with a choice for
managing advanced chronic renal disease among hemodialysis, peritoneal dialysis, 
kidney transplant, conservative, or palliative care. The selection of the most
adequate alternatives should be tailored to meet individual needs, considering
variables such as patient's choice, clinical status, and social context, analyzed
from a geriatric perspective, aiming not only to prolong patient's life
expectancy, but also to improve the patient's quality of life. Frailty and
sarcopenia are highly prevalent comorbidities found in very elderly population,
particularly in the end-stage chronic renal disease population. Both
comorbidities have a strong negative impact on health general status, and
specific treatment should be provided in conjunction with the selected management
for renal replacement, except when a palliative care has been implemented.
Moreover, the detected degree of frailty in a renal patient can have an important
influence on the decision about which modality of renal replacement treatment
will be selected. All these alternatives and considerations are discussed in the 
present review article.

DOI: 10.1007/s11255-014-0886-8 
PMID: 25475195  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Ren Nutr. 2014 Nov;24(6):364-70. doi: 10.1053/j.jrn.2014.09.001. Epub 2014 Oct 
22.

Chronic kidney disease, frailty, and unsuccessful aging: a review.

Walker SR(1), Wagner M(2), Tangri N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology, Seven Oaks General Hospital,
University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology, University of Würzburg,
Bavaria, Germany.
(3)Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology, Seven Oaks General Hospital,
University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada. Electronic address:
ntangri@sogh.mb.ca.

The global prevalence of chronic kidney disease (CKD) is rising, particularly
among the elderly population. Defining aging as successful or unsuccessful has
become clinically relevant in the last 15 years, with an increased recognition of
the frail phenotype. Frailty has been shown to be associated with CKD and poorer 
outcomes, such as death or dialysis. It is likely that the mechanisms of disease 
in CKD such as altered protein metabolism, inflammation, oxidative stress, and
anemia accelerate normal aging and lead to worsening frailty in elderly patients 
with CKD.

Copyright © 2014 National Kidney Foundation, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.jrn.2014.09.001 
PMID: 25443544  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Nephron Clin Pract. 2014;128(1-2):73-8. doi: 10.1159/000363624. Epub 2014 Nov 4.

Geriatric assessment for therapeutic decision-making regarding renal replacement 
in elderly patients with advanced chronic kidney disease.

Rodriguez Villarreal I(1), Ortega O, Hinostroza J, Cobo G, Gallar P, Mon C,
Herrero JC, Ortiz M, Di Giogia C, Oliet A, Vigil A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Hospital Severo Ochoa, Leganes/Madrid, Spain.

In patients older than 75 years with advanced chronic kidney disease (CKD), the
decision between treatment with dialysis [intention to treat with dialysis (ITD)]
or conservative care (CC) is a challenge. Geriatric assessment can be helpful.
The aim was to identify which factors had had an influence on
decision-making.METHODS: We recruited 56 patients. At baseline we analyzed age,
frailty (defined following the criteria of Fried et al. [J Gerontol A Biol Sci
Med Sci 2001;56:146-156]), dependence for activities of daily living (ADL),
cognitive impairment, depression, comorbidity, cardiovascular disease, and
diabetes. After full information about prognosis and treatment options, the
preferences of the patients and families were taken into consideration as
determinants in the decision-making process. During the follow-up, we evaluated
clinical and laboratory parameters, hospitalization, mortality and reevaluated
frailty.
RESULTS: Twenty patients opted for CC, and 36 patients opted for ITD. On
univariate analysis, the predictive factors of the election of CC were age,
prefrailty, cognitive impairment, and dependence for ADL. In the multivariate
analysis, age and prefrailty remained as predictors for the choice of CC.
Hospitalizations were more frequent in CC. Survival was similar in both groups (p
= 0.098).
CONCLUSIONS: Frailty assessment could be useful for decision-making about the
treatment in elderly patients with CKD. CC may be a good treatment option.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000363624 
PMID: 25378358  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Semin Dial. 2015 May-Jun;28(3):259-65. doi: 10.1111/sdi.12318. Epub 2014 Nov 6.

Diagnosis and Treatment of Low Testosterone among Patients with End-Stage Renal
Disease.

Bao Y(1), Johansen KL.

Author information: 
(1)John Muir Medical Group, Walnut Creek, California.

The prevalence of low testosterone level is particularly high among patients with
end-stage renal disease (ESRD) and has been associated with mortality. In
populations without ESRD, low testosterone level has also been associated with a 
number of morbidities including cardiovascular disease, diabetes mellitus, low
muscle mass, low bone mass, low physical performance, and frailty. However, there
is controversy regarding what constitutes low testosterone level in the aging
population and at what level replacement therapy with testosterone is indicated. 
There are no randomized controlled trials investigating long-term outcomes of
testosterone replacement therapy in populations with or without ESRD. Available
trial results suggest equivocal improvements in sexual function. Muscle mass and 
bone mineral density appear to improve, but results in physical function and
performance are mixed and there are no data on fracture prevention. Some recent
data suggest harm when testosterone was given to men with limited mobility.
Finally, there is little evidence that testosterone adds to existing
erythropoietin agents in the treatment of anemia in ESRD. Due to lack of evidence
supporting long-term use of testosterone, the authors recommend against the
routine use of testosterone in ESRD patients with low testosterone levels.
Testosterone treatment can be considered in those with low bone mass and total
testosterone level <200 ng/dl, or in younger patients with sexual complaints with
total testosterone level lower than the reference range. It is important to
engage patients in discussion of risks and benefits before initiating
testosterone therapy; testosterone therapy should be discontinued if the intended
treatment effect is not observed after short-term use.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/sdi.12318 
PMCID: PMC4422337
PMID: 25376701  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Semin Dial. 2015 May-Jun;28(3):221-3. doi: 10.1111/sdi.12319. Epub 2014 Nov 4.

The Elderly are Different: Initiating Dialysis in Frail Geriatric Patients.

Beben T(1), Rifkin DE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, University of California, San 
Diego, California.

Decisions and discussions about the initiation of dialysis in the elderly are
often challenging because of the high prevalence of comorbidities and frailty in 
this population. Mortality is high, functional decline is likely, and quality of 
life tends to be lower in the elderly on dialysis. It is thus important to
counsel these patients on the risks, benefits, and burdens of dialysis to assist 
them in making an informed choice that is in line with their goals, preferences, 
and expectations. For some patients, dialysis may be a desirable choice. For
others, the alternative of palliative care may provide a more favorable balance
of benefits versus burdens. Elderly patients who choose to proceed with dialysis 
often benefit from an interdisciplinary team that helps to manage and monitor
their health status, while maximizing the benefits of treatment and decreasing
its potential harms. These goals can be promoted by effective communication and
through individualized decisions about vascular access, medication choices, and
dietary limitations. Finally, close monitoring of functional status will help to 
determine whether dialysis remains in a patient's best interest and when
alternatives should be offered.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/sdi.12319 
PMID: 25366524  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Nephron Clin Pract. 2014;127(1-4):94-100. doi: 10.1159/000363721. Epub 2014 Sep
24.

Renal functional reserve and renal recovery after acute kidney injury.

Sharma A(1), Mucino MJ, Ronco C.

Author information: 
(1)International Renal Research Institute of Vicenza (IRRIV), San Bortolo
Hospital, Vicenza, Italy.

Renal functional reserve (RFR) represents the capacity of the kidney to increase 
glomerular filtration rate (GFR) in response to certain physiological or
pathological stimuli or conditions. Once baseline GFR is determined, RFR can be
assessed clinically after an oral protein load or intravenous amino acid
infusion. In clinical practice, baseline GFR displays variable levels due to diet
or other factors. RFR is the difference between peak 'stress' GFR induced by the 
test (p.o. or i.v.) and the baseline GFR. In clinical scenarios where
hyperfiltration is present (high baseline GFR due to pregnancy, hypertension or
diabetic nephropathy, in solitary kidney or kidney donors), RFR may be fully or
partially used to achieve normal or supranormal renal function. Since commonly
used renal function markers, such as GFR, may remain within normal ranges until
50% of nephrons are lost or in patients with a single remnant kidney, the RFR
test may represent a sensitive and early way to assess the functional decline in 
the kidney. RFR assessment may become an important tool to evaluate the ability
of the kidney to recover completely or partially after a kidney attack. In case
of healing with a defect and progressive fibrosis, recovery may appear complete
clinically, but a reduced RFR may be a sign of a maladaptive repair or
subclinical loss of renal mass. Thus, a reduction in RFR may represent the
equivalent of renal frailty or susceptibility to insults. The main aim of this
article is to review the concept of RFR, its utility in different clinical
scenarios, and future perspective for its use.

2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000363721 
PMID: 25343829  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Chronic Kidney Disease (Partial Update): Early Identification and Management of
Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults in Primary and Secondary Care.

National Clinical Guideline Centre (UK).
London: National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (UK); 2014 Jul.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence: Clinical Guidelines .

The Renal National Service Framework (NSF), and the subsequent NICE Clinical
Practice Guideline for early identification and management of adults with chronic
kidney disease (CKD) in primary and secondary care (CG73), served to emphasise
the change in focus in renal medicine from treatment of established kidney
disease to earlier identification and prevention of kidney disease. CKD describes
abnormal kidney function and/or structure. It is common, frequently unrecognised 
and often coexists with other conditions (for example, cardiovascular disease and
diabetes). Moderate to severe CKD also carries an increased risk of other
significant adverse outcomes such acute kidney injury, falls, frailty and
mortality. The risk of developing CKD increases with increasing age, and some
conditions that coexist with CKD become more severe and increasingly prevalent as
kidney dysfunction advances. CKD can progress to end-stage kidney disease
(ESKD)in a small but significant percentage of people. CKD is usually
asymptomatic but it is detectable, and tests for detecting CKD are both simple
and freely available. There is evidence that treatment can prevent or delay the
progression of CKD, reduce or prevent the development of complications and reduce
the risk of cardiovascular disease. However, because of a lack of specific
symptoms, CKD frequently remains undetected and unrecognised. As a consequence
people with CKD are often not diagnosed, or diagnosed late when CKD is at an
advanced stage. Late diagnosis is associated with increased morbidity, mortality 
and healthcare associated costs.

PMID: 25340245 


320. Am J Kidney Dis. 2015 Mar;65(3):443-50. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2014.08.011. Epub
2014 Oct 8.

Understanding by older patients of dialysis and conservative management for
chronic kidney failure.

Tonkin-Crine S(1), Okamoto I(2), Leydon GM(2), Murtagh FE(3), Farrington K(4),
Caskey F(5), Rayner H(6), Roderick P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Primary Care and Population Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom. Electronic address:
sktc1o07@soton.ac.uk.
(2)Primary Care and Population Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Palliative Care, Policy and Rehabilitation, King's College
London, London, United Kingdom.
(4)Renal Unit, Lister Hospital, Stevenage, United Kingdom.
(5)Renal Unit, Southmead Hospital, Bristol, United Kingdom.
(6)Department of Renal Medicine, Heart of England NHS Foundation Trust,
Birmingham, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Am J Kidney Dis. 2015 Mar;65(3):372-4.

BACKGROUND: Older adults with chronic kidney disease stage 5 may be offered a
choice between dialysis and conservative management. Few studies have explored
patients' reasons for choosing conservative management and none have compared the
views of those who have chosen different treatments across renal units.
STUDY DESIGN: Qualitative study with semistructured interviews.
SETTINGS & PARTICIPANTS: Patients 75 years or older recruited from 9 renal units.
Units were chosen to reflect variation in the scale of delivery of conservative
management.
METHODOLOGY: Semistructured interviews audiorecorded and transcribed verbatim.
ANALYTICAL APPROACH: Data were analyzed using thematic analysis.
RESULTS: 42 interviews were completed, 4 to 6 per renal unit. Patients were
sampled from those receiving dialysis, those preparing for dialysis, and those
choosing conservative management. 14 patients in each group were interviewed.
Patients who had chosen different treatments held varying beliefs about what
dialysis could offer. The information that patients reported receiving from
clinical staff differed between units. Patients from units with a more
established conservative management pathway were more aware of conservative
management, less often believed that dialysis would guarantee longevity, and more
often had discussed the future with staff. Some patients receiving conservative
management reported that they would have dialysis if they became unwell in the
future, indicating the conditional nature of their decision.
LIMITATIONS: Recruitment of older adults with frailty and comorbid conditions was
difficult and therefore transferability of findings to this population is
limited.
CONCLUSIONS: Older adults with chronic kidney disease stage 5 who have chosen
different treatment options have contrasting beliefs about the likely outcomes of
dialysis for those who are influenced by information provided by renal units.
Supporting renal staff in discussing conservative management as a valid
alternative to dialysis for a subset of patients will aid informed decision
making. There is a need for better evidence about conservative management to
support shared decision making for older people with chronic kidney failure.

Crown Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2014.08.011 
PMCID: PMC4339698
PMID: 25304984  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Minerva Med. 2014 Dec;105(6):487-95. Epub 2014 Oct 2.

Is TAVI superior to surgery in high-risk patients? Insight into the concept of
individual risk assessment.

Benfari G(1), Onorati F, Rossi A, Abbasciano R, Zivelonghi C, Salsano A,
Ribichini F, Santini F, Vassanelli F, Mazzucco A, Faggian G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, University of Verona Medical School, Verona, Italy -
francesco.onorati@ospedaleuniverona.it.

The prevalence of aortic valve stenosis (AS) is growing in developed countries
because its prevalence increases with age. A growing number of elderly patients
are currently referred to specialized centres to be evaluated for potential
therapeutic strategies. Indeed, two techniques are nowadays able to treat
high-risk AS patients: TAVI and surgical replacement (AVR). It is the purpose of 
the present review to summarize current knowledge on safety and efficacy of AVR
and TAVI in high-risk patients; to focus on some aspects of recently published
guidelines; to emphasize the growing importance of pre-operative individual risk 
assessment, which is considered the real crucial point for patient selection and 
trial's comparisons. Indeed, it is worth of noting that currently adopted
risk-scores do not show satisfactory performances. Accordingly, it becomes of
utmost importance to investigate several baseline but still neglected patients'
characteristics (e.g. frailty, functional status, co-morbid conditions, etc.), as
well as their pathogenetic relationships with interventional results and
follow-up prognosis. All these items are emphasized in the present review.
Finally, we have tried to anticipate future scenarios in terms of both ongoing
clinical trials and improvements of risk-scores.


PMID: 25274462  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Am J Kidney Dis. 2014 Oct;64(4):489-91. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2014.06.026.

Frailty in CKD--is only seeing worth believing?

Roshanravan B(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Electronic address: broshanr@uw.edu.

Comment on
    Am J Kidney Dis. 2014 Oct;64(4):600-7.

DOI: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2014.06.026 
PMCID: PMC4304660
PMID: 25257324  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


323. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2014 Dec;148(6):3110-7. doi:
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2014.07.087. Epub 2014 Aug 7.

The impact of frailty on outcomes after cardiac surgery: a systematic review.

Sepehri A(1), Beggs T(2), Hassan A(3), Rigatto C(4), Shaw-Daigle C(5), Tangri
N(4), Arora RC(6).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada.
(2)School of Medicine, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
(4)Renal Program, Seven Oaks General Hospital, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada;
Section of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, 
Manitoba, Canada.
(5)St Boniface General Hospital, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.
(6)University of Manitoba Health Sciences Libraries, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada. 
Electronic address: rakeshcarora@gmail.com.

Comment in
    J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2014 Dec;148(6):3117-8.

OBJECTIVE: Current preoperative assessments for cardiac surgery, such as the
European System for Cardiac Operative Risk Evaluation II and the Society of
Thoracic Surgeons risk score, are limited in their ability to predict
postoperative outcomes. This is thought to be due to the reliance on
chronological age as a predictor of health. In geriatrics, frailty assessments
have been developed as a tool in determining physiologic functioning capacity.
Whether or not frailty predicts postoperative outcomes independent of existing
cardiac preoperative risk scores remains unknown.
METHODS: We performed a systematic review to determine the association of frailty
with negative postoperative outcomes such as major adverse cardiac and
cerebrovascular events (MACCE) in patients undergoing cardiac surgery. We
searched PubMed, EMBASE, the Cochrane library, and Ageline from inception until
July 2013 and screened 5913 abstracts for potential inclusion. Of these, 6
studies examined the relationship between objective frailty assessments and
postoperative outcomes. Our included studies evaluated 4756 patients undergoing
cardiac surgery.
RESULTS: Frailty, defined using multiple criteria, had a strong positive
relationship with the risk of MACCE (odds ratio, 4.89; 95% confidence interval,
1.64-14.60). Relationships were stronger in older patients undergoing
transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) than younger patients undergoing
coronary artery bypass grafting and valvular surgery (hazard ratio for frailty in
TAVR, 3.31-4.89 vs hazard ratio for non-TAVR, 1.10-3.16).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients deemed frail, determined using an objective assessment
tool, have a higher likelihood of experiencing mortality, morbidity, functional
decline, and MACCE following cardiac surgery, regardless of definition. Further
study is needed to determine which components of frailty are most predictive of
negative postoperative outcomes before integration in risk prediction scores.

Copyright © 2014 The American Association for Thoracic Surgery. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2014.07.087 
PMID: 25199821  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Transplant Rev (Orlando). 2014 Oct;28(4):188-92. doi: 10.1016/j.trre.2014.07.001.
Epub 2014 Jul 31.

Renal transplantation in elderly patients. How to select the candidates to the
waiting list?

Ponticelli C(1), Podestà MA(2), Graziani G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Nephrology and Dialysis unit, Humanitas Clinical and Research Center, Via
Manzoni 56, 20089, Rozzano (Milano), Italy. Electronic address:
ponticelli.claudio@gmail.com.
(2)Nephrology and Dialysis unit, Humanitas Clinical and Research Center, Via
Manzoni 56, 20089, Rozzano (Milano), Italy.

Today, old age does not represent a formal contraindication to kidney
transplantation. Rather, there is evidence that in elderly patients renal
transplantation offers longer life expectancy and better quality of life in
comparison with dialysis. Yet, the results of renal transplantation in recipients
older than 65years are inferior to those observed in younger adults, death with
functioning graft representing a major cause of failure. Therefore, the selection
of aged patients is of paramount importance. Apart from the routine clinical and 
biological investigations, three aspects have been relatively neglected by the
transplant community and may require a careful analysis in elderly candidates to 
transplantation: the presence and degree of frailty, the presence of
comorbidities and the adherence to prescriptions. Although there are rapid and
simple tests for assessing the degree of frailty in the elderly, there is no
clear cut-off value to decide whether a patient should be accepted or not. With
advanced age the prevalence and severity of cardiovascular events and other
diseases tend to increase. The use of combined age-comorbidity indices may be
helpful to identify patients at high risk of mortality. Another critical point is
the poor unintentional adherence to treatment, often caused by forgetfulness and 
mild cognitive impairment. These drawbacks may be further enhanced by a high
number of pills to take and by changes in the dosage or type of prescriptions. A 
careful screening of the presence and degree of frailty, comorbidity and poor
compliance to treatment is highly recommended before admitting older candidates
to the waiting list for transplantation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.trre.2014.07.001 
PMID: 25154797  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Kidney Blood Press Res. 2014;39(2-3):164-8. doi: 10.1159/000355792. Epub 2014 Jul
29.

Frailty, disability and physical exercise in the aging process and in chronic
kidney disease.

Greco A(1), Paroni G, Seripa D, Addante F, Dagostino MP, Aucella F.

Author information: 
(1)Geriatric Unit and Gerontology-Geriatrics Research Laboratory, Department of
Medical Sciences, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo
(FG), Italy.

Frailty in the elderly is a state of vulnerability to poor resolution of
homoeostasis after a stressor event and is a consequence of cumulative decline in
many physiological systems during a lifetime. This cumulative decline depletes
homoeostatic reserves until minor stressor events trigger disproportionate
changes in health status. It is usually associated to adverse health outcomes and
to one-year mortality risk. Physical exercise has found to be effective in
preventing frailty and disability in this population. Chronic kidney disease
(CKD) is also a clinical condition where protein energy-wasting, sarcopenia and
dynapenia ,very common symptoms in the frail elderly, may occur. Moreover elderly
and CKD patients are both affected by an impaired physical performance that may
be reversed by physical exercise with an improvement of the survival rate. These 
similarities suggest that frailty may be a common pathway of aging and CKD that
may induce disability and that can be prevented by a multidimensional approach in
which physical exercise plays an important role.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000355792 
PMID: 25117919  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Clin Interv Aging. 2014 Jul 16;9:1109-14. doi: 10.2147/CIA.S62877. eCollection
2014.

Linagliptin use in older individuals with type 2 diabetes.

Pratley RE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Florida Hospital Diabetes Institute, Orlando, FL, USA ; Translational Research
Institute for Metabolism and Diabetes, Orlando, FL, USA ; Sanford-Burnham Medical
Research Institute, Orlando, FL, USA.

Older people have the highest prevalence of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) of
any age group and are thus frequent users of glucose-lowering agents. Because
individuals 65 years or older are underrepresented in clinical studies, there is 
a lack of information regarding the efficacy and safety of available treatments
in this population. Additionally, a high prevalence of comorbidities,
polypharmacy, and frailty can make treatment of T2DM in this population
challenging. Safety is an important consideration when choosing a treatment for
older individuals. Renal impairment is quite common in older patients with T2DM
and can contribute to hypoglycemia. Hypoglycemia can lead to serious
consequences, such as falls and fractures, and cognitive changes. As such,
hemoglobin A₁c treatment targets, typically <7% in the general population, are
less stringent in older people, with the goal being an individualized target that
balances efficacy and safety. Many glucose-lowering agents can cause adverse
events detrimental to older individuals, such as hypoglycemia (insulin,
sulfonylureas), weight gain (sulfonylureas, thiazolidinediones), gastrointestinal
events (metformin), and fractures (thiazolidinediones), and are contraindicated
or require dose adjustments in those with renal impairment (most oral/injectable 
agents). Orally administered dipeptidyl peptidase (DPP)-4 inhibitors have a low
risk of hypoglycemia and are generally well tolerated. Linagliptin is the only
DPP-4 inhibitor excreted through nonrenal pathways and therefore does not require
any dose adjustment in older patients with kidney disease. This paper reviews the
findings of a recent study by Barnett et al assessing the efficacy and safety of 
the DPP-4 inhibitor linagliptin in patients with T2DM aged 70 years or older,
which concluded that linagliptin may be a useful glucose-lowering option for
older patients with T2DM.

DOI: 10.2147/CIA.S62877 
PMCID: PMC4108453
PMID: 25083132  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Rev Med Liege. 2014 May-Jun;69(5-6):287-93.

[How to manage chronic kidney disease in the elderly?].

[Article in French]

Krzesinski JM, Delanaye P.

From age 30 onwards, kidney function physiologically decreases although this
deterioration cannot yet be called chronic kidney disease. The latter appears in 
those exposed to cardiovascular risk factors associated with inflammation and
oxidative stress. A diffuse atherosclerosis then develops Patients with a
decreased glomerular filtration rate, especially below the threshold of 45
ml/min, are characterised by a poor physical heath and by cognitive disorders,
leading to frailty. In these conditions, a management strategy to reduce the
increased risk of acute kidney injury should be outlined and the need for renal
replacement therapy be considered. One must try to maintain the best possible
quality of life, promoting in some situations a conservative approach.


PMID: 25065234  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Kidney Int. 2014 Sep;86(3):475-80. doi: 10.1038/ki.2014.231. Epub 2014 Jul 2.

Ethical challenges with hemodialysis patients who lack decision-making capacity: 
behavioral issues, surrogate decision-makers, and end-of-life situations.

Feely MA(1), Albright RC(2), Thorsteinsdottir B(3), Moss AH(4), Swetz KM(5).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA [2] Division
of General Internal Medicine, Section of Palliative Medicine, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(2)1] Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA [2] Division
of Nephrology Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(3)1] Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA [2] Division
of Primary Care Internal Medicine Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA [3]
Robert D. and Patricia E. Kern Center for the Science of Health Care Delivery and
Bioethics Research Program, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(4)Center for Health Ethics and Law, Section of Nephrology, Robert C. Byrd Health
Sciences Center, West Virginia University, Morgantown, West Virginia, USA.
(5)1] Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA [2] Division
of General Internal Medicine, Section of Palliative Medicine, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota, USA [3] Robert D. and Patricia E. Kern Center for the
Science of Health Care Delivery and Bioethics Research Program, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota, USA.

Hemodialysis (HD) is routinely offered to patients with end-stage renal disease
in the United States who are ineligible for other renal replacement modalities.
The frequency of HD among the US population is greater than all other countries, 
except Taiwan and Japan. In US, patients are often dialyzed irrespective of age, 
comorbidities, prognosis, or decision-making capacity. Determination of when
patients can no longer dialyze is variable and can be dialysis-center specific.
Determinants may be related to progressive comorbidities and frailty, mobility or
access issues, patient self-determination, or an inability to tolerate the
treatment safely for any number of reasons (e.g., hypotension, behavioral
issues). Behavioral issues may impact the safety of not only patients themselves,
but also those around them. In this article the authors present the case of an
elderly patient on HD with progressive cognitive impairment and combative
behavior placing him and others at risk of physical harm. The authors discuss the
medical, ethical, legal, and psychosocial challenges to care of such patients who
lack decision-making capacity with a focus on variable approaches by regions and 
culture. This manuscript provides recommendations and highlights resources to
assist nephrologists, dialysis personnel, ethics consultants, and palliative
medicine teams in managing such patients to resolve conflict.

DOI: 10.1038/ki.2014.231 
PMID: 24988063  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


329. NPJ Prim Care Respir Med. 2014 Jun 12;24:14008. doi: 10.1038/npjpcrm.2014.8.

The prevalence of COPD co-morbidities in Serbia: results of a national survey.

Nagorni-Obradovic LM(1), Vukovic DS(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia [2] Clinic
for Pulmonology, Clinical Centre of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Social Medicine, Centre School of Public
Health, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.

BACKGROUND: Research studies have found different prevalence rates for
co-morbidities in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
AIMS: The aim of our study was to investigate the prevalence of co-morbidities as
well as functional limitations in subjects with COPD.
METHODS: The study was based on a nationally representative sample of the
population of Serbia. Information on the health of the population was obtained
from interviews and anthropometric measurements. In this study we analysed a
total of 10,013 respondents aged 40 years or older. There were 653 subjects with 
COPD and 9,360 respondents without COPD.
RESULTS: Out of the 10,013 respondents, 5,377 were aged 40-59 years and 4,636
were 60 years or older. The prevalence of COPD was 5.0% in respondents aged 40-59
years and 8.3% in those aged 60 years or older; the total prevalence was 6.5%.
The most prevalent co-morbidities among respondents with COPD were hypertension
(54.5%) and dyslipidaemia (26.5%). The prevalence of all analysed co-morbidities 
was higher in respondents with COPD and the difference was highly statistically
significant, except for stroke and malignancies, for which the difference was
significant. Analysis showed that respondents with COPD had a higher prevalence
of all analysed clinical factors (dizziness, obesity, anaemia and frailty) and
functional impairments (mobility and hearing and visual impairment) compared with
respondents without COPD. For those aged 40-59 years the difference was highest
for mobility difficulty (four times higher prevalence in COPD patients) and
anaemia (three times higher in COPD patients).
CONCLUSION: Our analysis showed that the most prevalent co-morbidities in COPD
were hypertension, dyslipidaemia, chronic renal disease and anxiety/depression.
The finding suggests that health professionals should actively assess
co-morbidities in patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.1038/npjpcrm.2014.8 
PMCID: PMC4373300
PMID: 24921714  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


330. JAMA Surg. 2014 Aug;149(8):766-72. doi: 10.1001/jamasurg.2014.296.

Superiority of frailty over age in predicting outcomes among geriatric trauma
patients: a prospective analysis.

Joseph B(1), Pandit V(1), Zangbar B(1), Kulvatunyou N(1), Hashmi A(1), Green
DJ(1), O'Keeffe T(1), Tang A(1), Vercruysse G(1), Fain MJ(1), Friese RS(1), Rhee 
P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Trauma, Critical Care, Burns, and Acute Care Surgery, Department
of Surgery, University of Arizona Medical Center, Tucson.

Comment in
    JAMA Surg. 2014 Aug;149(8):773.

IMPORTANCE: The Frailty Index (FI) is a known predictor of adverse outcomes in
geriatric patients. The usefulness of the FI as an outcome measure in geriatric
trauma patients is unknown.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the usefulness of the FI as an effective assessment tool in 
predicting adverse outcomes in geriatric trauma patients.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: A 2-year (June 2011 to February 2013)
prospective cohort study at a level I trauma center at the University of Arizona.
We prospectively measured frailty in all geriatric trauma patients. Geriatric
patients were defined as those 65 years or older. The FI was calculated using 50 
preadmission frailty variables. Frailty in patients was defined by an FI of 0.25 
or higher.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary outcome measure was in-hospital
complications. The secondary outcome measure was adverse discharge disposition.
In-hospital complications were defined as cardiac, pulmonary, infectious,
hematologic, renal, and reoperation. Adverse discharge disposition was defined as
discharge to a skilled nursing facility or in-hospital mortality. Multivariate
logistic regression was used to assess the relationship between the FI and
outcomes.
RESULTS: In total, 250 patients were enrolled, with a mean (SD) age of 77.9 (8.1)
years, median Injury Severity Score of 15 (range, 9-18), median Glasgow Coma
Scale score of 15 (range, 12-15), and mean (SD) FI of 0.21 (0.10). Forty-four
percent (n = 110) of patients had frailty. Patients with frailty were more likely
to have in-hospital complications (odds ratio, 2.5; 95% CI, 1.5-6.0; P = .001)
and adverse discharge disposition (odds ratio, 1.6; 95% CI, 1.1-2.4; P = .001).
The mortality rate was 2.0% (n = 5), and all patients who died had frailty.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: The FI is an independent predictor of in-hospital
complications and adverse discharge disposition in geriatric trauma patients.
This index should be used as a clinical tool for risk stratification in this
patient group.

DOI: 10.1001/jamasurg.2014.296 
PMID: 24920308  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2015 Feb;17(2):107-15. doi: 10.1111/dom.12319. Epub 2014 Jun
25.

Dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors can minimize the hypoglycaemic burden and
enhance safety in elderly people with diabetes.

Avogaro A(1), Dardano A, de Kreutzenberg SV, Del Prato S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Section of Diabetes and Metabolic Diseases, University
of Padova, Padua, Italy.

The prevalence of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) among elderly people is
increasing. Often associated with disabilities/comorbidities, T2DM lowers the
chances of successful aging and is independently associated with frailty and an
increased risk of hypoglycaemia, which can be further exacerbated by
antihyperglycaemic treatment. From this perspective, the clinical management of
T2DM in the elderly is challenging and requires individualization of optimum
glycaemic targets depending on comorbidities, cognitive functioning and ability
to recognize and self-manage the disease. The lack of solid evidence-based
medicine supporting treatment guidelines for older people with diabetes further
complicates the matter. Several classes of medicine for the treatment of T2DM are
currently available and different drug combinations are often required to achieve
individualized glycaemic goals. Many of these drugs, however, carry disadvantages
such as the propensity to cause weight gain or hypoglycaemia. Dipeptidyl
peptidase-4 (DPP-4) inhibitors, a recent addition to the pharmacological
armamentarium, have become widely accepted in clinical practice because of their 
efficacy, low risk of hypoglycaemia, neutral effect on body weight, and
apparently greater safety in patients with kidney failure. Although more
information is needed to reach definitive conclusions, growing evidence suggests 
that DPP-4 inhibitors may become a valuable component in the pharmacological
management of elderly people with T2DM. The present review aims to delineate the 
potential advantages of this pharmacological approach in the treatment of elderly
people with T2DM.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/dom.12319 
PMID: 24867662  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Stat Med. 2014 Oct 15;33(23):4073-86. doi: 10.1002/sim.6211. Epub 2014 May 20.

An approach to addressing selection bias in survival analysis.

Carlin CS(1), Solid CA.

Author information: 
(1)Medica Research Institute, Minnetonka, MN, U.S.A.

This work proposes a frailty model that accounts for non-random treatment
assignment in survival analysis. Using Monte Carlo simulation, we found that
estimated treatment parameters from our proposed endogenous selection survival
model (esSurv) closely parallel the consistent two-stage residual inclusion
(2SRI) results, while offering computational and interpretive advantages. The
esSurv method greatly enhances computational speed relative to 2SRI by
eliminating the need for bootstrapped standard errors and generally results in
smaller standard errors than those estimated by 2SRI. In addition, esSurv
explicitly estimates the correlation of unobservable factors contributing to both
treatment assignment and the outcome of interest, providing an interpretive
advantage over the residual parameter estimate in the 2SRI method. Comparisons
with commonly used propensity score methods and with a model that does not
account for non-random treatment assignment show clear bias in these methods,
which is not mitigated by increased sample size. We illustrate using actual
dialysis patient data comparing mortality of patients with mature arteriovenous
grafts for venous access to mortality of patients with grafts placed but not yet 
ready for use at the initiation of dialysis. We find strong evidence of
endogeneity (with estimate of correlation in unobserved factors ρ^=0.55) and
estimate a mature-graft hazard ratio of 0.197 in our proposed method, with a
similar 0.173 hazard ratio using 2SRI. The 0.630 hazard ratio from a frailty
model without a correction for the non-random nature of treatment assignment
illustrates the importance of accounting for endogeneity.

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/sim.6211 
PMCID: PMC4159434
PMID: 24845211  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Am J Kidney Dis. 2014 Oct;64(4):600-7. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2014.03.016. Epub 2014
Apr 30.

Comparison of self-report-based and physical performance-based frailty
definitions among patients receiving maintenance hemodialysis.

Johansen KL(1), Dalrymple LS(2), Delgado C(3), Kaysen GA(2), Kornak J(4), Grimes 
B(4), Chertow GM(5).

Author information: 
(1)United States Renal Data System Nutrition Special Studies Center, University
of California, San Francisco, CA; Division of Nephrology, University of
California, San Francisco, CA; Nephrology Section, San Francisco VA Medical
Center, University of California, San Francisco, CA; Department of Epidemiology &
Biostatistics, University of California, San Francisco, CA. Electronic address:
kirsten.johansen@ucsf.edu.
(2)United States Renal Data System Nutrition Special Studies Center, University
of California, San Francisco, CA; University of California, San Francisco
Division of Nephrology, University of California, Davis, CA.
(3)United States Renal Data System Nutrition Special Studies Center, University
of California, San Francisco, CA; Division of Nephrology, University of
California, San Francisco, CA; Nephrology Section, San Francisco VA Medical
Center, University of California, San Francisco, CA.
(4)United States Renal Data System Nutrition Special Studies Center, University
of California, San Francisco, CA; Department of Epidemiology & Biostatistics,
University of California, San Francisco, CA.
(5)United States Renal Data System Nutrition Special Studies Center, University
of California, San Francisco, CA; Division of Nephrology, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Palo Alto, CA.

Erratum in
    Am J Kidney Dis. 2015 Jul;66(1):178.

Comment in
    Am J Kidney Dis. 2014 Oct;64(4):489-91.

BACKGROUND: A well-accepted definition of frailty includes measurements of
physical performance, which may limit its clinical utility.
STUDY DESIGN: In a cross-sectional study, we compared prevalence and patient
characteristics based on a frailty definition that uses self-reported function to
the classic performance-based definition and developed a modified
self-report-based definition.
SETTING & PARTICIPANTS: Prevalent adult patients receiving hemodialysis in 14
centers around San Francisco and Atlanta in 2009-2011.
INDEX TESTS: Self-report-based frailty definition in which a score lower than 75 
on the Physical Function scale of the 36-Item Short Form Health Survey (SF-36)
was substituted for gait speed and grip strength in the classic definition;
modified self-report definition with optimized Physical Function score cutoff
points derived in a development (one-half) cohort and validated in the other
half.
REFERENCE TEST: Performance-based frailty defined as 3 of the following: weight
loss, weakness, exhaustion, low physical activity, and slow gait speed.
RESULTS: 387 (53%) patients were frail based on self-reported function, of whom
209 (29% of the cohort) met the performance-based definition. Only 23 (3%) met
the performance-based definition of frailty only. The self-report definition had 
90% sensitivity, 64% specificity, 54% positive predictive value, 93% negative
predictive value, and 72.5% overall accuracy. Intracellular water per kilogram of
body weight and serum albumin, prealbumin, and creatinine levels were highest
among nonfrail individuals, intermediate among those who were frail by
self-report, and lowest among those who also were frail by performance. Age,
percentage of body fat, and C-reactive protein level followed an opposite
pattern. The modified self-report definition had better accuracy (84%; 95% CI,
79%-89%) and superior specificity (88%) and positive predictive value (67%).
LIMITATIONS: Our study did not address prediction of outcomes.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients who meet the self-report-based but not the
performance-based definition of frailty may represent an intermediate phenotype. 
A modified self-report definition can improve the accuracy of a
questionnaire-based method of defining frailty.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2014.03.016 
PMCID: PMC4177262
PMID: 24793033  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Am J Med Sci. 2014 Oct;348(4):277-82. doi: 10.1097/MAJ.0000000000000250.

Risk factors for frailty in a large prevalent cohort of hemodialysis patients.

Kutner NG(1), Zhang R, Huang Y, McClellan WM, Soltow QA, Lea J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine (NGK), Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia; Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics (RZ,
YH), Rollins School of Public Health, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia;
Department of Medicine (WMM, JL), Division of Nephrology, Emory University School
of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia; Department of Epidemiology (WMM), Rollins School
of Public Health, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia; and Department of Medicine 
(QAS), Division of Pulmonology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia.

BACKGROUND: Although individuals with kidney disease, including those dependent
on dialysis, often present clinically with signs and symptoms consistent with
frailty, there is limited information about sociodemographic and clinical risk
factors that may be associated.
METHODS: Seven hundred forty-five patients undergoing hemodialysisbetween 2009
and 2011 in 7 Atlanta dialysis clinics and 7 San Francisco bay area dialysis
clinics were assessed using the validated Fried frailty index (recent
unintentional weight loss, reported exhaustion, low grip strength, slow walk
speed, low physical activity) that defines frailty as the presence of 3 or more
criteria. Study coordinators interviewed participants; measured grip strength,
walk speed, and body composition; and reviewed records for clinical and
laboratory parameters. Logistic regression models were used to estimate the
association of patient characteristics with frailty.
RESULTS: In adjusted analyses, peripheral vascular disease and cardiac diseases, 
including dysrhythmia, atrial fibrillation, tachycardia, pericarditis, and
cardiac arrest, were associated with higher odds for frailty, whereas black race 
and higher serum albumin concentration were associated with lower odds for
frailty.
CONCLUSIONS: In multivariable analyses, the risk for frailty in patients
undergoing hemodialysis, as assessed by the presence of 3 or more criteria that
comprise the Fried frailty index, was increased in association with peripheral
vascular disease and cardiac conditions, such as dysrhythmia and atrial
fibrillation, and was decreased for those with higher serum albumin concentration
and for blacks compared with whites. Among patients who met the Fried definition 
of frailty, 78% scored as frail on walk speed and 56% scored as frail on grip
strength, the 2 physical performance measures.

DOI: 10.1097/MAJ.0000000000000250 
PMCID: PMC4169714
PMID: 24762748  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Cardiovasc Revasc Med. 2014 Jun;15(4):258-60. doi: 10.1016/j.carrev.2014.02.008. 
Epub 2014 Mar 6.

Does specific interventional risk scoring better predict mortality than
comorbidity in nonagenerians undergoing coronary angioplasty?

Ormerod JO(1), Ramcharitar S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Wiltshire Cardiac Centre, Great Western Hospital, Swindon SN3 6BB, UK.
(2)Wiltshire Cardiac Centre, Great Western Hospital, Swindon SN3 6BB, UK.
Electronic address: steve.ramcharitar@chem.ox.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Preliminary study to assess the risk profile and outcomes of patients
aged over 90years at the time of percutaneous coronary intervention.
METHODS: A database search was performed to identify patients 90years or over at 
the time of percutaneous coronary intervention. Risk profile scores (Charlson
Comorbidity Index, SYNTAX, Logistic clinical SYNTAX, New York PTCA score and
frailty indices) were evaluated on 24 consecutive patients in order to determine 
the best predictor for survival. Between both groups (survivors and
non-survivors) unpaired Student's t-test was used to determine statistical
significance.
RESULTS: The New York PTCA score was significantly higher in those patients that 
died in hospital (n=5) when compared to those who survived to discharge (n=19)
(NY PTCA score of 20.9±5.4 vs. 4.5±0.8, p<0.001) and this was also seen with
mortality at 12months. The level of co-morbidity (Charlson index) was similar in 
patients who died in hospital (n=5) compared with those who survived to discharge
(n=19, Charlson comorbidity index of 3.4±0.7 vs.3.9±0.6, p=0.70). This trend was 
also observed at 1year. The average level of frailty (by the CSHA Clinical
Frailty Scale), SYNTAX score and logistic clinical SYNTAX were not significantly 
different between the two groups both at discharge and at 12months. Choosing an
arbitrary New York PTCA score of 9%, nearly two thirds of patients above this
level died, whereas no patient below this level of risk died in hospital.
CONCLUSION: This small observational study found that nonagenarians who underwent
PCI had relatively low comorbidity and SYNTAX scores. The specific coronary
intervention (New York PTCA) risk score appears to have more predictive power in 
this small group of patients than the other three scores. Crucially, the factors 
that determine risk by New York PTCA score - haemodynamic instability, shock,
pulmonary oedema, renal failure, etc. - are commonly encompassed by an
"end-of-bed" assessment of the patient and these patients that pass this test
ought not to be denied PCI on the basis of their advanced years.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.carrev.2014.02.008 
PMID: 24685014  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens. 2014 May;23(3):291-7. doi:
10.1097/01.mnh.0000444821.87873.7b.

Cognitive and physical function in chronic kidney disease.

Weiner DE(1), Seliger SL.

Author information: 
(1)aTufts Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts bUniversity of Maryland Medical
Center, Baltimore VA Medical Center, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Both cognitive and physical function are commonly impaired in 
individuals with chronic kidney disease (CKD), resulting in important impacts on 
their quality of life and overall health. This review summarizes the burden of
cognitive and physical impairment in CKD, focusing on recent research that
highlights a possible unifying microvascular cause among these shared comorbid
conditions.
RECENT FINDINGS: Multiple small studies have been published recently evaluating
cognitive and physical functioning in people with CKD. These studies overall
demonstrate a high burden of comorbid conditions in people with CKD, including
microvascular disease, that may result in cognitive impairment. Additionally,
studies demonstrate that physical function is substantially worse than expected
in individuals with CKD, that decreased physical activity is associated with
worse outcomes, that frailty is very common and associated with an increased risk
of death, and that structured exercise programs have small but tangible
short-term effects on markers of physical performance.
SUMMARY: Impaired cognitive function and physical performance are important
factors impacting the lives of people with CKD. Further research is necessary to 
better treat these important comorbid conditions in people with CKD.

DOI: 10.1097/01.mnh.0000444821.87873.7b 
PMCID: PMC4052721
PMID: 24638060  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Health Qual Life Outcomes. 2014 Feb 28;12:27. doi: 10.1186/1477-7525-12-27.

Frailty and quality of life: a cross-sectional study of Brazilian patients with
pre-dialysis chronic kidney disease.

Mansur HN, Colugnati FA, Grincenkov FR, Bastos MG.

PURPOSE: Chronic kidney disease (CKD) induces frailty and worsens quality of life
(QOL), even in the early stages of the disease and in young patients. However,
there is a lack of knowledge about the relationship between frailty and QOL in
CKD patients. Thus, we investigated this relationship in a sample of CKD
patients.
METHODS: A cross-observational study was conducted, in which 61 CKD patients
receiving pre-dialysis treatment were assessed. All participants completed the
Short Form-36 Health Survey (SF-36). We used valid and reliable methods to
classify subjects as frail or non-frail according to Johansen's et al. (2007)
criteria. A one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and chi-square tests were used
to compare the groups. In addition, Spearman's correlation analysis was conducted
to measure associations between identified variables and frailty. We also
performed simple linear regression using the SF-36 physical and mental composite 
scores.
RESULTS: Almost half of the sample (42.6%) exhibited evidence of frailty. The
groups differed significantly in terms of age, gender, and all SF-36 domains,
excluding Social Functioning and Role Emotional. Frailty was significantly
associated with all SF-36 domains, again excluding Social Functioning and Role
Emotional. Regression analysis revealed no significant between-group differences 
in composite physical and mental health scores generated by the SF-36 (p > 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Frail and non-frail CKD patients differed significantly in seven of
the eight SF-36 domains. The frail group displayed diminished physical and mental
functioning when their SF-36 scores were divided by their physical and mental
composite scores. Frailty was correlated with QOL domains, with the exception of 
the social domain. There is a need for interventions targeting the
characteristics of frailty, to provide better treatment and optimize overall QOL.

DOI: 10.1186/1477-7525-12-27 
PMCID: PMC4234401
PMID: 24580960  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


338. QJM. 2014 Jul;107(7):545-55. doi: 10.1093/qjmed/hcu043. Epub 2014 Feb 24.

Survival of patients with ANCA-associated vasculitis on chronic dialysis: data
from the French REIN registry from 2002 to 2011.

Romeu M(1), Couchoud C(1), Delarozière JC(1), Burtey S(1), Chiche L(1), Harlé
JR(1), Gondouin B(1), Brunet P(1), Berland Y(1), Jourde-Chiche N(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Nephrology, Hopital Conception, AP-HM, Aix-Marseille
Université, 147 Bd Baille, 13385 Marseille Cedex 5, Agence de la Biomédecine,
Registre REIN, 1 avenue du Stade de France, 93212 Saint-Denis-La Plaine, France, 
Department of Public Health, Hopital Timone, AP-HM, Aix-Marseille Université, 27 
Bd Jean Moulin, 13385 Marseille Cedex 5 and Department of Internal Medicine,
Hopital Conception, AP-HM, Aix-Marseille Université, 147 Bd Baille, 13385
Marseille Cedex 5, France.
(2)From the Department of Nephrology, Hopital Conception, AP-HM, Aix-Marseille
Université, 147 Bd Baille, 13385 Marseille Cedex 5, Agence de la Biomédecine,
Registre REIN, 1 avenue du Stade de France, 93212 Saint-Denis-La Plaine, France, 
Department of Public Health, Hopital Timone, AP-HM, Aix-Marseille Université, 27 
Bd Jean Moulin, 13385 Marseille Cedex 5 and Department of Internal Medicine,
Hopital Conception, AP-HM, Aix-Marseille Université, 147 Bd Baille, 13385
Marseille Cedex 5, France noemie.jourde@ap-hm.fr.

BACKGROUND: Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)-associated vasculitides
(AAV) can lead to end-stage renal disease in patients with renal involvement.
OBJECTIVE: This study evaluated the survival of AAV patients on chronic dialysis 
in France.
METHODS: Between 2002 and 2011, a total of 425 AAV patients started chronic
dialysis and were registered in the Renal Epidemiology and Information Network.
We analysed survival censored for renal transplantation, recovery of renal
function and loss to follow-up. AAV patients were compared with 794 matched
non-AAV patients on chronic dialysis.
RESULTS: A total of 166 (39%) patients with microscopic polyangiitis and 259
(61%) patients with granulomatosis with polyangiitis were registered. Within a
median follow-up of 23 months, 58 (14%) patients received a renal allograft and
19 (4%) recovered renal function. Median survival on dialysis was 5.35 years (95%
CI, 4.4-6.3) and survival rates at 3 months, 1, 3 and 5 years were 96%, 85%, 68% 
and 53%, respectively. A total of 143 (41%) patients died after a median of 16
months. Causes of death were cardiovascular (29%), infections (20%), malnutrition
(13%), malignancies (4%), AAV relapse (2%), miscellaneous (14%) and unknown
(18%). Multivariate logistic regression identified three independent risk factors
associated with AAV patients' mortality: age (HR = 1.05/year, P < 0.001),
peripheral artery disease (HR = 2.62, P = 0.003) and frailty (HR = 2.43, P <
0.001). Survival of AAV patients did not differ from non-AAV controls, but
infectious mortality was higher in AAV patients (20% vs. 8%, P < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: Survival of AAV patients in chronic dialysis, although poor, was
comparable to survival of non-AAV controls on dialysis. There was a similar
burden of cardiovascular mortality, but higher infectious mortality.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Association of Physicians. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/qjmed/hcu043 
PMID: 24570478  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


339. J Vasc Surg. 2014 Jun;59(6):1644-50. doi: 10.1016/j.jvs.2013.12.039. Epub 2014
Feb 21.

Impact of cumulative intravascular contrast exposure on renal function in
patients with occlusive and aneurysmal vascular disease.

Kougias P(1), Sharath S(2), Barshes NR(3), Lowery B(2), Garcia A(4), Pak T(4),
Bechara CF(3), Pisimisis G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Michael E. DeBakey VA Medical Center, Houston, Tex;
Department of Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Tex. Electronic
address: pkougias@bcm.edu.
(2)Department of Surgery, Michael E. DeBakey VA Medical Center, Houston, Tex.
(3)Department of Surgery, Michael E. DeBakey VA Medical Center, Houston, Tex;
Department of Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Tex.
(4)Department of Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Tex.

OBJECTIVE: Patients with occlusive or aneurysmal vascular disease are repeatedly 
exposed to intravascular (IV) contrast for diagnostic or therapeutic purposes. We
sought to determine the long-term impact of cumulative iodinated IV contrast
exposure (CIVCE) on renal function; the latter was defined by means of National
Kidney Foundation (NKF) criteria.
METHODS: We performed a longitudinal study of consecutive patients without renal 
insufficiency at baseline (NFK stage I or II) who underwent interventions for
arterial occlusive or aneurysmal disease. We collected detailed data on any IV
iodinated contrast exposure (including diagnostic or therapeutic angiography,
cardiac catheterization, IV pyelography, computed tomography with IV contrast,
computed tomographic angiography); medication exposure throughout the observation
period; comorbidities; and demographics. The primary end point was the
development of renal failure (RF) (defined as NFK stage 4 or 5). Analysis was
performed with the use of a shared frailty model with clustering at the patient
level.
RESULTS: Patients (n = 1274) had a mean follow-up of 5.8 (range, 2.2-14) years.
In the multivariate model with RF as the dependent variable and after adjusting
for the statistically significant covariates of baseline renal function (hazard
ratio [HR], 0.95; P < .001), diabetes (HR, 1.8; P = .007), use of an
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (HR, 0.63; P = .03), use of antiplatelets
(HR, 0.5; P = .01), cumulative number of open vascular operations performed (HR, 
1.2; P = .001), and congestive heart failure (HR, 3.2; P < .001), CIVCE remained 
an independent predictor for RF development (HR, 1.1; P < .001). In the
multivariate survival analysis model and after adjusting for the statistically
significant covariates of perioperative myocardial infarction (HR, 3.9; P <
.001), age at entry in the cohort (HR, 1.05; P = .035), total number of open
operations (HR, 1.51; P < .001), and serum albumin (HR, 0.47; P < .001), CIVCE
was an independent predictor of death (HR, 1.07; P < .001).
CONCLUSIONS: Cumulative IV contrast exposure is an independent predictor of RF
and death in patients with occlusive and aneurysmal vascular disease.

Published by Mosby, Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jvs.2013.12.039 
PMID: 24560864  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2014 May;70(5):549-55. doi: 10.1007/s00228-014-1652-7. Epub
2014 Feb 14.

The impact of frailty on pharmacokinetics in older people: using gentamicin
population pharmacokinetic modeling to investigate changes in renal drug
clearance by glomerular filtration.

Johnston C(1), Hilmer SN, McLachlan AJ, Matthews ST, Carroll PR, Kirkpatrick CM.

Author information: 
(1)Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.

PURPOSE: Frailty, a multifactorial biological syndrome characterized by a
cumulative dysregulation of physiological processes, is associated with changes
in pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. The aim of this study was to quantify
the effect of frailty on glomerular filtration of drugs, using the probe drug
gentamicin.
METHODS: Gentamicin concentrations and clinical data including the Reported
Edmonton Frail Scale score were pooled from two prospective observational
inpatient studies, one on prophylactic gentamicin for urologic surgery and one on
therapeutic gentamicin for the empiric treatment of sepsis. Population
pharmacokinetic modeling was performed using non-linear mixed effects modeling
(NONMEM program) to determine the impact of frailty on gentamicin clearance.
RESULTS: A one-compartment linear pharmacokinetic model best described the data
and the addition of frailty to the model reduced the random variability in
gentamicin clearance by 12 % after adjustment for renal function (estimated
creatinine clearance using lean body weight) and lean body weight. Frail patients
had an approximately 12 % lower (bootstrapping results: 14 % median) gentamicin
clearance than non-frail patients (calculated as a fractional effect of frailty).
CONCLUSIONS: Frailty may independently predict reduced clearance of gentamicin in
older patients. Frailty could be considered in the development of dosing
guidelines for drugs that undergo significant excretion through glomerular
filtration.

DOI: 10.1007/s00228-014-1652-7 
PMID: 24522409  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Clin Interv Aging. 2014 Jan 15;9:191-9. doi: 10.2147/CIA.S39763. eCollection
2014.

Current and emerging treatment options for the elderly patient with chronic
kidney disease.

Fassett RG(1).

Author information: 
(1)The University of Queensland, School of Human Movement Studies, Brisbane,
Queensland, Australia.

The objective of this article is to review the current and emerging treatments of
CKD prior to dialysis in the elderly. Worldwide, there are increasing numbers of 
people who are aged over 65 years. In parallel, there are increasing numbers of
elderly patients presenting with chronic kidney disease (CKD), particularly in
the more advanced stages. The elderly have quite different health care needs
related to their associated comorbidity, frailty, social isolation, poor
functional status, and cognitive decline. Clinical trials assessing treatments
for CKD have usually excluded patients older than 70-75 years; therefore, it is
difficult to translate current therapies recommended for younger patients with
CKD across to the elderly. Many elderly people with CKD progress to end-stage
kidney disease and face the dilemma of whether to undertake dialysis or accept a 
conservative approach supported by palliative care. This places pressure on the
patient, their family, and on health care resources. The clinical trajectory of
elderly CKD patients has in the past been unclear, but recent evidence suggests
that many patients over 75 years of age with multiple comorbidities have greatly 
reduced life expectancies and quality of life, even if they choose dialysis
treatment. Offering a conservative pathway supported by palliative care is a
reasonable option for some patients under these circumstances. The elderly person
who chooses to have dialysis will frequently have different requirements than
younger patients. Kidney transplantation can still result in improved life
expectancy and quality of life in the elderly, in carefully selected people.
There is a genuine need for the inclusion of the elderly in CKD clinical trials
in the future so we can produce evidence-based therapies for this group. In
addition, new therapies to treat and slow CKD progression are needed for all age 
groups.

DOI: 10.2147/CIA.S39763 
PMCID: PMC3896291
PMID: 24477220  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


342. J Clin Oncol. 2014 Feb 20;32(6):587-600. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2013.48.7934. Epub 2014
Jan 13.

International Myeloma Working Group consensus statement for the management,
treatment, and supportive care of patients with myeloma not eligible for standard
autologous stem-cell transplantation.

Palumbo A(1), Rajkumar SV, San Miguel JF, Larocca A, Niesvizky R, Morgan G,
Landgren O, Hajek R, Einsele H, Anderson KC, Dimopoulos MA, Richardson PG, Cavo
M, Spencer A, Stewart AK, Shimizu K, Lonial S, Sonneveld P, Durie BG, Moreau P,
Orlowski RZ.

Author information: 
(1)Antonio Palumbo and Alessandra Larocca, University of Torino, Torino; Michele 
Cavo, Seràgnoli Institute of Hematology, Bologna University School of Medicine,
Bologna, Italy; S. Vincent Rajkumar, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN; Jesus F. San
Miguel, University Hospital of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain; Ruben Niesvizky,
Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY; Gareth Morgan, Royal Marsden
Hospital, London, United Kingdom; Ola Landgren, National Cancer Institute,
Bethesda, MD; Roman Hajek, University of Ostrava School of Medicine and
University Hospital Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic; Hermann Einsele, University
of Wurzburg, Wurzburg, Germany; Kenneth C. Anderson and Paul G. Richardson,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA; Meletios A. Dimopoulos, University of
Athens School of Medicine, Athens, Greece; Andrew Spencer, Alfred Hospital,
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; A. Keith Stewart, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ;
Kazuyuki Shimizu, Aichi Gakuin Hospital, Nagoya, Japan; Sagar Lonial, Emory
University, Atlanta, GA; Pieter Sonneveld, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, the
Netherlands; Brian G.M. Durie, Cedars-Sinai Comprehensive Cancer Center, Los
Angeles, CA; Philippe Moreau, University Hospital, Nantes, France; and Robert Z. 
Orlowski, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX.

PURPOSE: To provide an update on recent advances in the management of patients
with multiple myeloma who are not eligible for autologous stem-cell
transplantation.
METHODS: A comprehensive review of the literature on diagnostic criteria is
provided, and treatment options and management of adverse events are summarized.
RESULTS: Patients with symptomatic disease and organ damage (ie, hypercalcemia,
renal failure, anemia, or bone lesions) require immediate treatment. The
International Staging System and chromosomal abnormalities identify high- and
standard-risk patients. Proteasome inhibitors, immunomodulatory drugs,
corticosteroids, and alkylating agents are the most active agents. The presence
of concomitant diseases, frailty, or disability should be assessed and, if
present, treated with reduced-dose approaches. Bone disease, renal damage,
hematologic toxicities, infections, thromboembolism, and peripheral neuropathy
are the most frequent disabling events requiring prompt and active supportive
care.
CONCLUSION: These recommendations will help clinicians ensure the most
appropriate care for patients with myeloma in everyday clinical practice.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2013.48.7934 
PMCID: PMC3918540
PMID: 24419113  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Am J Kidney Dis. 2014 Jun;63(6):913-27. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2013.11.017. Epub
2014 Jan 7.

Thematic synthesis of qualitative studies on patient and caregiver perspectives
on end-of-life care in CKD.

Tong A(1), Cheung KL(2), Nair SS(3), Kurella Tamura M(4), Craig JC(5),
Winkelmayer WC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Sydney School of Public Health, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia; 
Centre for Kidney Research, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Westmead, NSW,
Australia. Electronic address: allison.tong@sydney.edu.au.
(2)Division of Nephrology, University of Vermont College of Medicine, Burlington,
VT.
(3)Division of Nephrology, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA.
(4)Division of Nephrology, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA; Geriatric Research
and Education Clinical Center, VA Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto, CA.
(5)Sydney School of Public Health, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia; 
Centre for Kidney Research, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Westmead, NSW,
Australia.

BACKGROUND: Although dialysis prolongs life for patients with end-stage kidney
disease, 20% of deaths in this population are preceded by dialysis therapy
withdrawal. Recently, there has been more focus on conservative (nondialytic)
care as a legitimate option, particularly for elderly patients. This study aims
to describe patients' and caregivers' perspectives on conservative treatment and 
end-of-life care in chronic kidney disease (CKD).
STUDY DESIGN: Systematic review and thematic synthesis of qualitative studies.
SETTING & POPULATION: Patients with CKD and caregivers.
SEARCH STRATEGY & SOURCES: MEDLINE, Embase, PsycINFO, CINAHL, and reference lists
were searched to May 2013.
ANALYTICAL APPROACH: Thematic synthesis was used to analyze the findings.
RESULTS: 26 studies involving more than 711 patients (non-dialysis dependent
[n=41], hemodialysis [n=544], peritoneal dialysis [n=9]; unspecified dialysis
modality [n=31], conservative management [n=86]) and 178 caregivers were
included. We identified 5 themes: invasive suffering (bodily deterioration, loss 
of freedom and independence, unyielding fatigue and pain, resignation, treatment 
burden and harm, financial strain), personal vulnerability (imminence of death,
misunderstanding and judgment, autonomy and dignity, medical abandonment, trust
and safety), relational responsibility (being a burden, demonstrating loyalty,
protecting others from grief), negotiating existential tensions (accepting
natural course of life, disrupted aging, worthlessness, living on borrowed time, 
respecting sanctity of life, life satisfaction, preserving self-identity), and
preparedness (decisional clarity, informational power, spirituality and hope).
LIMITATIONS: Non-English articles were excluded; therefore, the transferability
of findings to other populations is unclear.
CONCLUSIONS: Some patients with CKD experience physical and psychosocial frailty 
and feel ambivalent about prolonging life. Some caregivers believe in providing
relief from suffering, but are uncertain about making decisions regarding
dialysis therapy initiation and discontinuation. We suggest that CKD management
should encompass palliative care strategies that promote emotional resilience,
sense of well-being, and self-value. Also, respectful and attentive communication
may empower patients to convey their values and preferences about their own care.

Copyright © 2014 National Kidney Foundation, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2013.11.017 
PMID: 24411716  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


344. J Res Health Sci. 2014 Winter;14(1):11-7.

Prevalence of malnutrition and its correlates in older adults living in long stay
institutions situated in Beirut, Lebanon.

El Zoghbi M(1), Boulos C(2), Awada S(1), Rachidi S(1), Al-Hajje A(1), Bawab W(1),
Saleh N(3), Salameh P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical and Epidemiological Research Laboratory, Faculty of Pharmacy,
Doctoral School of Sciences & Technology, Lebanese University, Beirut, Lebanon.
(2)Department of Nutrition, Faculty of Pharmacy, Saint Joseph University, Beirut,
Lebanon.
(3)Faculty of Public Health, Lebanese University, Fanar, Beirut, Lebanon.
(4)Clinical and Epidemiological Research Laboratory, Faculty of Pharmacy,
Doctoral School of Sciences & Technology, Lebanese University, Beirut, Lebanon.
pascalesalameh1@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Malnutrition represents an important issue in older adults;
unfortunately, there is lack of data concerning this topic in Lebanon. This paper
aims to provide a description of nutritional status and its correlates in older
adults living in long stay institutions situated in Beirut.
METHODS: This cross-sectional study was conducted in three long stay institutions
in Beirut in 2012. The study population was composed of people aged 65 years and 
above, having a score of Folstein Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) greater
than 14 and without renal failure requiring dialysis. Subjects meeting inclusion 
criteria filled out a questionnaire consisting of nutritional status scale (Mini 
Nutritional Assessment: MNA) and several other parts (demographic,
self-assessment of the state health, smoking and alcohol, physical dependence,
quality of life, frailty, depression, social isolation and loneliness). Data were
entered and analyzed using the statistical software SPSS (Statistical Package for
Social Sciences), version 17.0 (Chicago, IL, USA).
RESULTS: Among 111 older adults (55 men and 56 women), 14 (12.6%) were
malnourished, 54 (48.7%) were at risk of malnutrition and 43 (38.7%) had an
adequate nutritional status. Multivariate analysis showed that physical exercise,
depression, frailty and cognitive function were independent correlates of
nutritional status of older adults. This model explained 42.2% (adjusted R2 =
0.422) of the older adults nutritional status variability.
CONCLUSIONS: We found a moderate percentage of malnutrition in older adults
living in long stay institutions situated in Beirut, and the correlates of
malnutrition in older adults were low physical exercise, depression, frailty and 
low cognitive function.


PMID: 24402844  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Nihon Rinsho. 2013 Nov;71(11):1987-92.

[Attention to the use of oral anti-diabetic medication in older adults with type 
2 diabetes].

[Article in Japanese]

Jojima T(1), Aso Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Dokkyo Medical University.

The increase proportion of older persons is continuously growing in worldwide,
especially in Japan. Subsequently, the number of older adults with type 2
diabetes is also increasing. Older adults with diabetes are at substantial risk
of frailty, cognitive impairment, and physical disability. They are also at
greater risk for polypharmacy, depression, urinary incontinence, injurious fall, 
and persistent pain. Thus, older patients are a very heterogenous group of
individuals. Hypoglycemia is a frequent adverse effect of treatment with
sulfonylurea, glinides, or insulin in older adults with diabetes. In this review,
we describe the efficacy and safety of some anti-diabetic oral agents used in
older adults with type 2 diabetes, including an incretin-based drug dipeptidyl
peptidase 4(DPP4) inhibitors.


PMID: 24397171  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


346. J Frailty Aging. 2014;3(4):230-3. doi: 10.14283/jfa.2014.29.

Considerations for the Perioperative Care of Elderly and Frail Patients.

Kurrek MM(1), Barnett S, Minville V.

Author information: 
(1)Matt M. Kurrek, 150 College Street, Room 121, Fitzgerald Building, Toronto, ON
M5S 3E2, Canada, Tel: (416) 987-4306, Fax: (416) 978-2408, Email:
m.kurrek@utoronto.ca.

The number of elderly patients undergoing anesthesia is increasing. At the same
time aging is associated with decreased functional reserve of all major organ
systems and an increase in comorbid conditions, requiring a comprehensive
perioperative evaluation to minimize morbidity and mortality. The preoperative
assessment should focus on the risk/benefit analysis vis-à-vis the proposed
intervention, allowing the practitioner to adapt surgical and anesthetic care, as
well optimize health and functional status. In addition to the usual evaluation
for cardiac and pulmonary risk, the preoperative assessment in the older patient 
should also address the risk of postoperative cognitive dysfunction and delirium.
'Do-not-resuscitate' orders must be clarified with the patients or substitute
decision maker. Studies have not been able to clearly show the superiority of one
anesthetic approach for the geriatric patient, although there are probably
advantages to using regional anesthetic techniques. Overall the patient's
preoperative functional status along with the proposed intervention is the
primary determinants of the patient's long term functional outcome and wellbeing.
The elderly patient may be at his most vulnerable during the postoperative phase,
and a relatively high frequency of adverse events in the elderly, including
respiratory insufficiency, myocardial and cerebrovascular ischemia, renal
failure, infectious complications as well as delirium and postoperative cognitive
dysfunction have been observed. Perioperative interventions should target
modifiable risk factors and the avoidance of even minor complications with an
ultimate goal of improving long-term outcome.

DOI: 10.14283/jfa.2014.29 
PMID: 27048862 


347. Adv Chronic Kidney Dis. 2014 Jan;21(1):72-80. doi: 10.1053/j.ackd.2013.07.005.

Decision-making in patients with cancer and kidney disease.

Scherer JS(1), Swidler MA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatrics and Palliative Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY; Department of Geriatrics and Palliative Medicine and
Renal Division, Department of Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 
New York, NY; Renal Division, Department of Medicine, Montefiore Medical Center, 
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY. Electronic address:
jennifer.scherer@mssm.edu.
(2)Department of Geriatrics and Palliative Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY; Department of Geriatrics and Palliative Medicine and
Renal Division, Department of Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 
New York, NY; Renal Division, Department of Medicine, Montefiore Medical Center, 
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY.

Thoughtful decision-making in a patient with cancer and kidney disease requires a
comprehensive discussion of prognosis and therapy options for both conditions
framed by the individual's preferences and goals of care. An estimate of overall 
prognosis is generated that includes the patient's clinical presentation and
parameters associated with adverse outcomes, such as age, performance status,
frailty, malnutrition, and comorbidities. Empathic communication of this
information using a shared decision-making approach can lead to an informed
decision that respects patient autonomy and is consistent with the patient's
"big-picture" goals and personal values.

Copyright © 2014 National Kidney Foundation, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.ackd.2013.07.005 
PMID: 24359989  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


348. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2014 Feb;147(2):568-75. doi:
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2013.10.006. Epub 2013 Nov 19.

Effect of severe left ventricular systolic dysfunction on hospital outcome after 
transcatheter aortic valve implantation or surgical aortic valve replacement:
results from a propensity-matched population of the Italian OBSERVANT multicenter
study.

Onorati F(1), D'Errigo P(2), Grossi C(3), Barbanti M(4), Ranucci M(5), Covello
DR(6), Rosato S(2), Maraschini A(2), Santoro G(7), Tamburino C(4), Seccareccia
F(2), Santini F(8), Menicanti L(5); OBSERVANT Research Group.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiac Surgery, University of Verona Medical School, Verona,
Italy. Electronic address: frankono@libero.it.
(2)National Centre for Epidemiology, Surveillance and Health Promotion, Istituto 
Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, S. Croce e Carle Hospital, Cuneo, Italy.
(4)Division of Cardiology, Ferrarotto Hospital, University of Catania, Italy, and
Excellence Through Newest Advances Foundation, Catania, Italy.
(5)Department of Cardiothoracic and Vascular Anesthesia-Intensive Care Unit and
Department of Cardiac Surgery, IRCCS Policlinico San Donato, San Donato Milanese,
Milan, Italy.
(6)Department of Anesthesia and Intensive Care, IRCCS San Raffaele, Milan, Italy.
(7)Division of Cardiology, Careggi Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(8)Division of Cardiac Surgery, University Hospital San Martino, Genoa, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: Despite demonstration of the superior outcomes of transcatheter aortic
valve implantation (TAVI) versus optimal medical therapy for severe left
ventricular systolic dysfunction, studies comparing TAVI and surgical aortic
valve replacement (AVR) in this high-risk group have been lacking.
METHODS: We performed propensity matching for age, gender, baseline
comorbidities, previous interventions, priority at hospital admission, frailty
score, New York Heart Association class, EuroSCORE, and associated cardiac
diseases. Next, the 30-day mortality and procedure-related morbidity of 162
patients (81 TAVI vs 81 AVR) with severe left ventricular systolic dysfunction
(ejection fraction ≤ 35%) were analyzed at the Italian National Institute of
Health.
RESULTS: The 30-day mortality was comparable (P = .37) between the 2 groups. The 
incidence of periprocedural acute myocardial infarction (P = .55), low output
state (P = .27), stroke (P = .36), and renal dysfunction (peak creatinine level, 
P = .57) was also similar between the 2 groups. TAVI resulted in significantly
greater postprocedural permanent pacemaker implantation (P = .01) and AVR in more
periprocedural transfusions (P < .01) despite a similar transfusion rate per
patient (2.8 ± 3.7 for TAVI vs 4.4 ± 3.8 for AVR; P = .08). The postprocedural
intensive care unit stay (median, 2 days after TAVI vs 3 days after AVR; P =
.34), intermediate care unit stay (median, 0 days after both TAVI and AVR; P =
.94), and hospitalization (median, 11 days after TAVI vs 14 days after AVR; P =
.51) were comparable.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with severe left ventricular systolic dysfunction, both 
TAVI and AVR are valid treatment options, with comparable hospital mortality and 
periprocedural morbidity. Comparisons of the mid- to long-term outcomes are
mandatory.

Copyright © 2014 The American Association for Thoracic Surgery. Published by
Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2013.10.006 
PMID: 24263007  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2014 Mar;472(3):1010-7. doi: 10.1007/s11999-013-3334-7.
Epub 2013 Oct 29.

Association of a modified frailty index with mortality after femoral neck
fracture in patients aged 60 years and older.

Patel KV(1), Brennan KL, Brennan ML, Jupiter DC, Shar A, Davis ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Scott and White Memorial Hospital, 2401 S 31st
Street, Temple, TX, 76508, USA, kpatel@sw.org.

Comment in
    Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2014 Mar;472(3):1018-9.

BACKGROUND: Frailty, a multidimensional syndrome entailing loss of energy,
physical ability, cognition, and health, plays a significant role in elderly
morbidity and mortality. No study has examined frailty in relation to mortality
after femoral neck fractures in elderly patients.
QUESTIONS/PURPOSES: We examined the association of a modified frailty index
abbreviated from the Canadian Study of Health and Aging Frailty Index to 1- and
2-year mortality rates after a femoral neck fracture. Specifically we examined:
(1) Is there an association of a modified frailty index with 1- and 2-year
mortality rates in patients aged 60 years and older who sustain a low-energy
femoral neck fracture? (2) Do the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves 
indicate that the modified frailty index can be a potential tool predictive of
mortality and does a specific modified frailty index value demonstrate increased 
odds ratio for mortality? (3) Do any of the individual clinical deficits
comprising the modified frailty index independently associate with mortality?
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed 697 low-energy femoral neck fractures in
patients aged 60 years and older at our Level I trauma center from 2005 to 2009. 
A total of 218 (31%) patients with high-energy or pathologic fracture,
postoperative complication including infection or revision surgery, fracture of
the contralateral hip, or missing documented mobility status were excluded. The
remaining 481 patients, with a mean age of 81.2 years, were included. Mortality
data were obtained from a state vital statistics department using date of birth
and Social Security numbers. Statistical analysis included unequal variance
t-test, Pearson correlation of age and frailty, ROC curves and area under the
curve, Hosmer-Lemeshow statistics, and logistic regression models.
RESULTS: One-year mortality analysis found the mean modified frailty index was
higher in patients who died (4.6 ± 1.8) than in those who lived (3.0 ± 2; p <
0.001), which was maintained in a 2-year mortality analysis (4.4 ± 1.8 versus 3.0
± 2; p < 0.001). In ROC analysis, the area under the curve was 0.74 and 0.72 for 
1- and 2-year mortality, respectively. Patients with a modified frailty index of 
4 or greater had an odds ratio of 4.97 for 1-year mortality and an odds ratio of 
4.01 for 2-year mortality as compared with patients with less than 4. Logistic
regression models demonstrated that the clinical deficits of mobility,
respiratory, renal, malignancy, thyroid, and impaired cognition were
independently associated with 1- and 2-year mortality.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients aged 60 years and older sustaining a femoral neck fracture,
with a higher modified frailty index, had increased 1- and 2-year mortality
rates, and the ROC analysis suggests that this tool may be predictive of
mortality. Patients with a modified frailty index of 4 or greater have increased 
risk for mortality at 1 and 2 years. Clinical deficits of mobility, respiratory, 
renal, malignancy, thyroid, and impaired cognition also may be independently
associated with mortality. The modified frailty index may be a useful tool in
predicting mortality, guiding patient and family expectations and elucidating
implant/surgery choices. Further prospective studies are necessary to strengthen 
the predictive power of the index.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Level IV, prognostic study. See Instructions for Authors for a
complete description of levels of evidence.

DOI: 10.1007/s11999-013-3334-7 
PMCID: PMC3916591
PMID: 24166073  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


350. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2014 Feb;25(2):381-9. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2013040431. Epub 2013
Oct 24.

Association between body composition and frailty among prevalent hemodialysis
patients: a US Renal Data System special study.

Johansen KL(1), Dalrymple LS, Delgado C, Kaysen GA, Kornak J, Grimes B, Chertow
GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology and.

Studies of frailty among patients on hemodialysis have relied on definitions that
substitute self-reported functioning for measures of physical performance and
omit weight loss or substitute alternate criteria. We examined the association
between body composition and a definition of frailty that includes measured
physical performance and weight loss in a cross-sectional analysis of 638 adult
patients receiving maintenance hemodialysis at 14 centers. Frailty was defined as
having three of following characteristics: weight loss, weakness, exhaustion, low
physical activity, and slow gait speed. We performed logistic regression with
body mass index (BMI) and bioelectrical impedance spectroscopy (BIS)-derived
estimates of intracellular water (ICW), fat mass, and extracellular water (ECW)
as the main predictors, and age, sex, race, and comorbidity as covariates.
Overall, 30% of participants were frail. Older age (odds ratio [OR], 1.31 per 10 
years; 95% confidence interval [95% CI], 1.14 to 1.50), diabetes (OR, 1.65; 95%
CI, 1.13 to 2.40), higher fat mass (OR, 1.18; 95% CI, 1.02 to 1.37), and higher
ECW (OR, 1.33; 95% CI, 1.20 to 1.47) associated with higher odds of frailty.
Higher ICW associated with lower odds of frailty (OR, 0.80 per kg; 95% CI, 0.73
to 0.87). The addition of BMI data did not change the area under the receiver
operating characteristics curve (AUC; AUC=0.66 versus 0.66; P=0.71), but the
addition of BIS data did change the AUC (AUC=0.72; P<0.001). Thus, individual
components of body composition but not BMI associate strongly with frailty in
this cohort of patients receiving hemodialysis.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2013040431 
PMCID: PMC3904567
PMID: 24158987  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Clin Ther. 2013 Nov;35(11):1659-68. doi: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2013.09.026. Epub
2013 Oct 19.

Pain management in older adults.

Tracy B(1), Sean Morrison R.

Author information: 
(1)Brookdale Department of Geriatrics and Palliative Medicine, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York. Electronic address:
bridget.tracy@mssm.edu.

BACKGROUND: Chronic pain is prevalent among older adults but is underrecognized
and undertreated. The approach to pain assessment and management in older adults 
requires an understanding of the physiology of aging, validated assessment tools,
and common pain presentations among older adults.
OBJECTIVE: To identify the overall principles of pain management in older adults 
with a specific focus on common painful conditions and approaches to
pharmacologic treatment.
METHODS: We searched PubMed for common pain presentations in older adults with
heart failure, end-stage renal disease, dementia, frailty, and cancer. We also
reviewed guidelines for pain management. Our review encompassed 2 guidelines, 10 
original studies, and 22 review articles published from 2000 to the present. This
review does not discuss nonpharmacologic treatments of pain.
RESULTS: Clinical guidelines support the use of opioids in persistent
nonmalignant pain. Opioids should be used in patients with moderate or severe
pain or pain not otherwise controlled but with careful attention to potential
toxic effects and half-life. In addition, clinical practice guidelines recommend 
use of oral nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs with extreme caution and for
defined, limited periods.
CONCLUSION: An understanding of the basics of pain pathophysiology, assessment,
pharmacologic management, and a familiarity with common pain presentations will
allow clinicians to effectively manage pain for older adults.

© 2013 Elsevier HS Journals, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2013.09.026 
PMID: 24148553  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


352. BMC Nephrol. 2013 Oct 22;14:228. doi: 10.1186/1471-2369-14-228.

Association of frailty and physical function in patients with non-dialysis CKD: a
systematic review.

Walker SR, Gill K, Macdonald K, Komenda P, Rigatto C, Sood MM, Bohm CJ, Storsley 
LJ, Tangri N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Seven Oaks Hospital, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada. ntangri@sogh.mb.ca.

BACKGROUND: Frailty is a condition characterized by a decline in physical
function and functional capacity. Common symptoms of frailty, such as weakness
and exhaustion, are prevalent in patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD). The 
increased vulnerability of frail patients with coexisting CKD may place them at a
heightened risk of encountering additional health complications. The purpose of
this systematic review was to explore the link between frailty, CKD and clinical 
outcomes.
METHODS: We searched for cross sectional and prospective studies in the general
population and in the CKD population indexed in EMBASE, Pubmed, Web of Science,
CINAHL, Cochrane and Ageline examining the association between frailty and CKD
and those relating frailty in patients with CKD to clinical outcomes.
RESULTS: We screened 5,066 abstracts and retrieved 108 studies for full text
review. We identified 7 studies associating frailty or physical function to CKD. 
From the 7 studies, we identified only two studies that related frailty in
patients with CKD to a clinical outcome. CKD was consistently associated with
increasing frailty or reduced physical function [odds ratios (OR) 1.30 to 3.12]. 
In patients with CKD, frailty was associated with a greater than two-fold higher 
risk of dialysis and/or death [OR from 2.0 to 5.88].
CONCLUSIONS: CKD is associated with a higher risk of frailty or diminished
physical function. Furthermore, the presence of frailty in patients with CKD may 
lead to a higher risk of mortality. Further research must be conducted to
understand the mechanisms of frailty in CKD and to confirm its association with
clinical outcomes.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2369-14-228 
PMCID: PMC4016413
PMID: 24148266  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


353. BMC Nephrol. 2013 Oct 16;14:224. doi: 10.1186/1471-2369-14-224.

Frailty and falls among adult patients undergoing chronic hemodialysis: a
prospective cohort study.

McAdams-DeMarco MA, Suresh S, Law A, Salter ML, Gimenez LF, Jaar BG, Walston JD, 
Segev DL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
MD, USA. dorry@jhmi.edu.

BACKGROUND: Patients undergoing hemodialysis are at high risk of falls, with
subsequent complications including fractures, loss of independence,
hospitalization, and institutionalization. Factors associated with falls are
poorly understood in this population. We hypothesized that insights derived from 
studies of the elderly might apply to adults of all ages undergoing hemodialysis;
we focused on frailty, a phenotype of physiological decline strongly associated
with falls in the elderly.
METHODS: In this prospective, longitudinal study of 95 patients undergoing
hemodialysis (1/2009-3/2010), the association of frailty with future falls was
explored using adjusted Poisson regression. Frailty was classified using the
criteria established by Fried et al., as a combination of five components:
shrinking, weakness, exhaustion, low activity, and slowed walking speed.
RESULTS: Over a median 6.7-month period of longitudinal follow-up, 28.3% of study
participants (25.9% of those under 65, 29.3% of those 65 and older) experienced a
fall. After adjusting for age, sex, race, comorbidity, disability, number of
medications, marital status, and education, frailty independently predicted a
3.09-fold (95% CI: 1.38-6.90, P=0.006) higher number of falls. This relationship 
between frailty and falls did not differ for younger and older adults (P=0.57).
CONCLUSIONS: Frailty, a validated construct in the elderly, was a strong and
independent predictor of falls in adults undergoing hemodialysis, regardless of
age. Our results may aid in identifying frail hemodialysis patients who could be 
targeted for multidimensional fall prevention strategies.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2369-14-224 
PMCID: PMC3852906
PMID: 24131569  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Hemodial Int. 2014 Jan;18(1):70-7. doi: 10.1111/hdi.12098. Epub 2013 Oct 9.

Correlates of ADL difficulty in a large hemodialysis cohort.

Kutner NG(1), Zhang R, Allman RM, Bowling CB.

Author information: 
(1)United States Renal Data System, Rehabilitation/Quality of Life Special
Studies Center, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.

Needing assistance with activities of daily living (ADL) is an early indicator of
functional decline and has important implications for individuals' quality of
life. However, correlates of need for ADL assistance have received limited
attention among patients undergoing maintenance hemodialysis (HD). A multicenter 
cohort of 742 prevalent HD patients was assessed in 2009-2011 and classified as
frail, prefrail and nonfrail by the Fried frailty index (recent unintentional
weight loss, reported exhaustion, low grip strength, slow walk speed, low
physical activity). Patients reported need for assistance with 4 ADL tasks and
identified contributing symptoms/conditions (pain, balance, endurance, weakness, 
others). Nearly 1 in 5 patients needed assistance with 1 or more ADL.
Multivariable analysis showed increased odds for needing ADL assistance among
frail (odds ratio [OR] 11.35; 95% confidence interval [CI] 5.50-23.41; P < 0.001)
and prefrail (OR 1.93; 95% CI 1.01-3.68; P = 0.046) compared with non-frail
patients. In addition, the odds for needing ADL assistance were lower among
blacks compared with whites and were higher among patients with diabetes, lung
disease, and stroke. Balance, weakness, and "other" (frequently dialysis-related)
symptoms/conditions were the most frequently named reasons for ADL difficulty. In
addition to interventions such as increasing physical activity that might delay
or reverse the process of frailty, the immediate symptoms/conditions to which
individuals attribute their ADL difficulty may have clinical relevance for
developing targeted management and/or treatment approaches.

© 2013 International Society for Hemodialysis.

DOI: 10.1111/hdi.12098 
PMCID: PMC3887518
PMID: 24118865  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Am J Nephrol. 2013;38(4):307-15. doi: 10.1159/000355568. Epub 2013 Oct 4.

Physical performance and frailty in chronic kidney disease.

Reese PP(1), Cappola AR, Shults J, Townsend RR, Gadegbeku CA, Anderson C, Baker
JF, Carlow D, Sulik MJ, Lo JC, Go AS, Ky B, Mariani L, Feldman HI, Leonard MB;
CRIC Study Investigators.

Collaborators: Appel LJ, Feldman HI, Go AS, He J, Kusek JW, Lash JP, Ojo A,
Rahman M, Townsend RR.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Division, Department of Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine at the
University of Pennsylvania, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pa., USA.

BACKGROUND: Poor physical performance and frailty are associated with elevated
risks of death and disability. Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is also strongly
associated with these outcomes. The risks of poor physical performance and
frailty among CKD patients, however, are not well established.
METHODS: We measured the Short Physical Performance Battery (SPPB; a summary test
of gait speed, chair raises and balance; range 0-12) and the five elements of
frailty among 1,111 Chronic Renal Insufficiency Cohort participants. Adjusting
for demographics and multiple comorbidities, we fit a linear regression model for
the outcome of SPPB score and an ordinal logistic regression model for frailty
status.
RESULTS: Median (interquartile range, IQR) age was 65 (57-71) years, median
estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) for non-dialysis patients was 49
(36-62) ml/min/1.73 m(2), and median SPPB score was 9 (7-10). Seven percent of
participants were frail and 43% were pre-frail. Compared with the SPPB score for 
eGFR >60 ml/min/1.73 m(2), the SPPB was 0.51 points lower for eGFR 30-59; 0.61
points lower for eGFR 15-29, and 1.75 points lower for eGFR <15 (p < 0.01 for all
comparisons). eGFR 30-59 (odds ratio, OR 1.45; p = 0.024), eGFR 15-29 (OR 2.02; p
= 0.002) and eGFR <15 (OR 4.83; p < 0.001) were associated with worse frailty
status compared with eGFR >60 ml/min/1.73 m(2).
CONCLUSIONS: CKD severity was associated with poor physical performance and
frailty in a graded fashion. Future trials should determine if outcomes for CKD
patients with frailty and poor physical performance are improved by targeted
interventions.

© 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000355568 
PMCID: PMC4019506
PMID: 24107579  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens. 2013 Nov;22(6):615-23. doi:
10.1097/MNH.0b013e328365b43a.

The association of physical activity and physical function with clinical outcomes
in adults with chronic kidney disease.

Painter P(1), Roshanravan B.

Author information: 
(1)aDepartment of Physical Therapy, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah
bKidney Research Institute, Division of Nephrology, University of Washington,
Seattle, Washington, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Despite guidelines supporting the regular assessment of
physical functioning and encouragement of physical activity in management of the 
patient with chronic kidney disease (CKD), implementation has been undermined by 
a lack of understanding of the evidence for this recommendation. The purpose of
this review is to present a summary of emerging data from larger epidemiologic
cohorts that report associations between low levels of physical functioning
and/or low physical activity and clinical outcomes in patients with CKD.
RECENT FINDINGS: Low levels of physical activity and poor physical functioning
are strongly associated with mortality and poor clinical outcomes in adult
patients with CKD, regardless of treatment modality. Low physical performance and
activity limitations are more prevalent in patients with CKD, regardless of age, 
compared to older community-dwelling adults.
SUMMARY: The strength of the evidence presented should strongly motivate a focus 
of treatment on assessing and improving physical activity and physical function
as part of routine patient-centered management of persons with CKD. Physical
activity interventions are warranted because patients with CKD, regardless of
age, have a high prevalence of low physical functioning and frailty that is
similar to or higher than the general population of elderly adults; physical
activity, physical function, and performance are strongly associated with
all-cause mortality; and exercise training and exercise counseling have been
shown to improve measures of physical functioning.

DOI: 10.1097/MNH.0b013e328365b43a 
PMID: 24100215  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Semin Dial. 2013 Nov-Dec;26(6):690-6. doi: 10.1111/sdi.12126. Epub 2013 Sep 4.

Frailty and dialysis initiation.

Johansen KL(1), Delgado C, Bao Y, Kurella Tamura M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, University of California, San 
Francisco, California; Nephrology Section, VA Medical Center, San Francisco,
California.

Erratum in
    Semin Dial. 2015 Jul-Aug;28(4):455.

Frailty is a physiologic state of increased vulnerability to stressors that
results from decreased physiologic reserves or dysregulation of multiple
physiologic systems. The construct of frailty has been operationalized as a
composite of poor physical function, exhaustion, low physical activity, and
weight loss. Several studies have now examined the prevalence of frailty among
chronic kidney disease (CKD) or end-stage renal disease (ESRD) patients and have 
found frailty to be more common among individuals with CKD than among those
without. Furthermore, frailty is associated with adverse outcomes among incident 
dialysis patients, including higher risk of hospitalization and death. Recent
evidence shows that frail patients are started on dialysis earlier (at a higher
estimated glomerular filtration rate [eGFR]) on average than nonfrail patients,
but it remains unclear whether these patients' frailty is a result of uremia or
is independent of CKD. The survival disadvantage that has been associated with
early initiation of dialysis in observational studies could be mediated in part
through confounding on the basis of unmeasured frailty. However, available data
do not suggest improvement in frailty upon initiation of dialysis; rather, the
trajectory appears to be toward higher levels of dependence in activities of
daily living (ADLs) after dialysis initiation. Overall, there are no data to
suggest that frail patients derive any benefit from early initiation of dialysis 
either in the form of improved survival or functional status.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/sdi.12126 
PMCID: PMC3984466
PMID: 24004376  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Injury. 2013 Dec;44(12):1945-8. doi: 10.1016/j.injury.2013.07.023. Epub 2013 Aug 
6.

Incidence of periprosthetic fractures after hip hemiarthroplasty: Are uncemented 
prostheses unsafe?

McGraw IW(1), Spence SC, Baird EJ, Eckhardt SM, Ayana GE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Trauma & Orthopaedics, Royal Alexandra Hospital, Paisley,
Scotland PA2 9PN, UK. Electronic address: iainmcgraw@gmail.com.

Displaced intracapsular fractures of the neck of femur are routinely treated in
the elderly with either cemented or uncemented hemiarthroplasty. Recent evidence 
suggests a superior outcome with the use of cement, but uncemented prostheses are
still employed for those with multiple co-morbidities or particular frailty. In
Scotland, the Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN) recommendations 
are used to identify which patients should receive a cemented prosthesis. These
are simply based upon the presence of cardiorespiratory disease, particularly in 
the frail elderly patient. Between January 2007 and June 2010, a total of 1397
patients with neck-of-femur fractures presented to our unit. Retrospective
analysis was performed with particular attention given to the rate of
postoperative periprosthetic fracture. As many as 546 fractures were treated with
hemiarthroplasty, of which 183 were treated with a cemented Exeter Trauma Stem
(ETS) and 363 were treated with an uncemented Austin-Moore prosthesis (AMP). At
the time of our retrospective analysis, we found that 15 (4%) patients treated
with an uncemented prosthesis went on to sustain a periprosthetic fracture. There
were no periprosthetic fractures in the cemented group (p=0.004). Data analysis
by case-note review of those patients sustaining a periprosthetic fracture was
then performed. Seven (50%) suffered from confusion secondary to dementia, six
(43%) had a history of significant cardiac disease (recent myocardial infarction 
(MI) or cardiac failure) and two (14%) had known renal impairment. The mean time 
to fracture after uncemented hemiarthroplasty was 2 years. The majority (80%)
were fractures which required further surgery. Revision surgery in these patients
was associated with an overall complication rate of 42% (mainly deep infection
and haemorrhage requiring transfusion). Two of the patients had a fracture that
could be treated conservatively. It is concluded that, in conjunction with the
treating senior anaesthetist, cemented implants should be considered in all
patients, especially those who are deemed to be frail and with multiple
co-morbidities. A periprosthetic fracture rate of 14% at a mean of 2 years after 
uncemented hemiarthroplasty represents a potentially unacceptable risk for such a
frail population. In particular, we feel that the AMP should not be used for
treating displaced intracapsular neck-of-femur fractures.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.injury.2013.07.023 
PMID: 24001784  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


359. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2013 Sep;61(9):1530-6. doi: 10.1111/jgs.12413. Epub 2013 Sep 3.

Cystatin C and frailty in older men.

Hart A(1), Paudel ML, Taylor BC, Ishani A, Orwoll ES, Cawthon PM, Ensrud KE;
Osteoporotic Fractures in Men Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota.

OBJECTIVES: To determine whether higher cystatin C would be associated with
greater frailty in men aged 65 and older.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional cohort study.
SETTING: Six U.S. sites.
PARTICIPANTS: A random sample of community-dwelling men aged 65 and older
enrolled in the Osteoporotic Fractures in Men (MrOS) Study (mean age 73.8; 9.8%
frail and 47.2% intermediate frailty; N = 1,602).
MEASUREMENTS: Serum cystatin C, creatinine, and frailty were measured. Frailty
was analyzed as an ordinal outcome of robust, intermediate frailty, and frail
using a multinomial logistic regression model, and the base model was adjusted
for age, race, and clinical site.
RESULTS: Higher cystatin C was associated with seven times greater odds of being 
frail than being robust (odds ratio (OR) quartile 4 vs 1 = 7.12, 95% confidence
interval (CI) = 3.76-13.46) and 2.4 times greater odds of intermediate frailty
than robust (OR quartile 4 vs 1 = 2.38, 95% CI = 1.70-3.32). The association was 
attenuated but persisted after adjusting for multiple possible confounders. In
contrast, neither higher serum creatinine (OR quartile 4 vs 1 = 1.36, 95% CI =
0.78-2.40) nor lower creatinine-based estimated glomerular filtration rate (OR
quartile 4 vs 1 = 1.01, 95% CI = 0.54-1.87) was associated in a graded manner
with greater odds of frailty.
CONCLUSION: Higher cystatin C, but not creatinine-based measures, was associated 
with greater odds of frailty in this cohort of older men.

© 2013, Copyright the Authors Journal compilation © 2013, The American Geriatrics
Society.

DOI: 10.1111/jgs.12413 
PMCID: PMC3773269
PMID: 24001352  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Med Care. 2013 Dec;51(12):1106-13. doi: 10.1097/MLR.0b013e3182a50297.

Hospitalization and skilled nursing care are predictors of influenza vaccination 
among patients on hemodialysis: evidence of confounding by frailty.

McGrath LJ(1), Cole SR, Kshirsagar AV, Weber DJ, Stürmer T, Brookhart MA.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Epidemiology, Gillings School of Global Public Health
†Medicine, Division of Nephrology and Hypertension ‡Medicine, Division of
Infectious Diseases, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC.

BACKGROUND: Observational studies of preventive medications, such as
vaccinations, can suffer from the healthy-user bias because vaccinated patients
may be healthier than unvaccinated patients. Indicators of health status and
frailty suitable for attenuating this bias could be identified in administrative 
data.
OBJECTIVE: To examine the association of baseline variables and time-dependent
hospitalization and skilled nursing care with the receipt of influenza
vaccination in patients with end-stage renal disease.
RESEARCH DESIGN: Observational cohort study using United States Renal Data System
files each year from 1999 to 2005.
SUBJECTS: Population-based cohorts that included >115,000 adult, hemodialysis
patients each year.
MEASURES: We estimated hazard ratios for the association of baseline variables
and time-dependent hospitalization days and skilled nursing days with influenza
vaccination, controlling for demographic and baseline health status variables.
RESULTS: Vaccination coverage increased from 47% in 1999 to 60% in 2005. Patients
with any length of hospitalization were less likely to be vaccinated, however,
the association was stronger in patients with longer stays [15-25 d: hazard
ratio=0.64 (95% confidence interval, 0.62-0.65); 26-30 d: 0.40 (0.38-0.42)].
Patients with any length of skilled nursing care of >1 day had similar estimates;
these patients were also less likely to be vaccinated [26-30 d: 0.66
(0.64-0.69)].
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with long hospitalizations or skilled nursing stays were
less likely to be vaccinated suggesting evidence of the healthy-user effect.
These variables could be used to account for bias in studies of preventive
services in patients on dialysis.

DOI: 10.1097/MLR.0b013e3182a50297 
PMCID: PMC5495477
PMID: 23969584  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Ann Thorac Surg. 2013 Oct;96(4):1336-1342. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2013.05.048.
Epub 2013 Jul 31.

Results differ between transaortic and open surgical aortic valve replacement in 
women.

Onorati F(1), D'Errigo P(2), Barbanti M(3), Rosato S(2), Covello DR(4),
Maraschini A(2), Ranucci M(5), Grossi C(6), Santoro G(7), Tamburino C(3), Santini
F(8), Seccareccia F(2); OBSERVANT Research Group.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiac Surgery, University of Verona Medical School, Verona,
Italy. Electronic address: frankono@libero.it.
(2)National Centre for Epidemiology, Surveillance and Health Promotion, Istituto 
Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy.
(3)Division of Cardiology, Ferrarotto Hospital, University of Catania, ETNA
Foundation, Catania, Italy.
(4)IRCCS Department of Anesthesia & Intensive Care, San Raffaele Hospital, Milan,
Italy.
(5)Department of Cardiothoracic and Vascular Surgery and Anesthesia-ICU, IRCCS
Policlinico San Donato, San Donato Milanese, Italy.
(6)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, S. Croce e Carle Hospital, Cuneo, Italy.
(7)Division of Cardiology, Careggi Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(8)Division of Cardiac Surgery, Ospedale San Martino University of Genoa Medical 
School, Genoa, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Despite the well-known impact of female sex on outcome after surgical
aortic valve replacement (sAVR), few studies investigated its role after
transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR).
METHODS: After propensity-matching for age, baseline comorbidities, previous
interventions, priority, frailty score, New York Heart Association class, left
ventricular function and associated cardiac diseases, hospital mortality, and
procedure-related morbidities of 388 women (194 TAVR versus 194 sAVR)-of 5,231
patients enrolled in 70 centers participating in this prospective multicenter
national registry-were analyzed at a central management unit of the Italian
National Institute of Health.
RESULTS: Although hospital mortality was comparable (4.1% TAVR versus 3.1% sAVR; 
p = 0.177), women undergoing sAVR showed a higher rate of transfusion (63.9%
versus 37.1% TAVR; p = 0.0001); higher number of transfusions per patient (3.6 ± 
0.4 versus 2.3 ± 0.3 TAVR; p = 0.049); a higher incidence of low cardiac output
state (5.7% versus 3.6% TAVR; p = 0.017) and acute renal failure (8.8% versus
4.1% TAVR; p = 0.01); and higher mean transprosthetic gradients (15.7 ± 12.6 mm
Hg versus 11.9 ± 10.7 mm Hg TAVR; p = 0.004). In contrast, women undergoing TAVR 
experienced significant postprocedural aortic regurgitation (mild, 37.6% versus
7.7% sAVR; moderate-to-severe, 7.1% versus 1.5% sAVR; p = 0.0001) and a higher
rate of stroke (7.7% versus 2.5% sAVR; p = 0.037), major vascular complications
(9.3% versus 0.5% sAVR; p = 0.0001), pacemaker implantation (12.4% versus 6.2%
sAVR; p = 0.004), need for emergent percutaneous coronary intervention (1.0%
versus 0% sAVR; p = 0.007), and longer intermediate care unit length of stay (2.5
± 4.4 days versus 1.4 ± 2.6 days sAVR; p = 0.008). Perioperative myocardial
infarction and lengths of intensive care unit stay and hospitalization were
comparable (not significant).
CONCLUSIONS: Women undergoing sAVR and TAVR experienced different periprocedural 
morbidities. These data strongly suggest the need to strictly individualize the
indications.

Copyright © 2013 The Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2013.05.048 
PMID: 23915582  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


362. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2014 Mar;69(3):315-22. doi: 10.1093/gerona/glt109.
Epub 2013 Aug 2.

Aging and chronic kidney disease: the impact on physical function and cognition.

Anand S(1), Johansen KL, Kurella Tamura M.

Author information: 
(1)MD Division of Nephrology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 777 Welch
Road, Suite DE, Room D100, Palo Alto, CA 94304. mktamura@stanford.edu.

Evidence has recently been building that the presence of chronic kidney disease
(CKD) is an independent contributor to decline in physical and cognitive
functions in older adults. CKD affects 45% of persons older than 70 years of age 
and can double the risk for physical impairment, cognitive dysfunction, and
frailty. To increase awareness of this relatively new concept of CKD as a risk
factor for accelerated aging, we review studies on the association of CKD with
physical function, frailty, and cognitive function. We also present a summary of 
the proposed mechanisms for these associations.

DOI: 10.1093/gerona/glt109 
PMCID: PMC4017829
PMID: 23913934  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


363. J Cardiothorac Surg. 2013 Jul 30;8:177. doi: 10.1186/1749-8090-8-177.

Development of a predictive model for major adverse cardiac events in a coronary 
artery bypass and valve population.

Herman CR(1), Buth KJ, Légaré JF, Levy AR, Baskett R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiac Surgery, Queen Elizabeth II Health Science Center,
Halifax, NS, Canada. cherman@dal.ca

BACKGROUND: Quality improvement initiatives in cardiac surgery largely rely on
risk prediction models. Most often, these models include isolated populations and
describe isolated end-points. However, with the changing clinical profile of the 
cardiac surgical patients, mixed populations models are required to accurately
represent the majority of the surgical population. Also, composite model
end-points of morbidity and mortality, better reflect outcomes experienced by
patients.
METHODS: The model development cohort included 4,270 patients who underwent
aortic or mitral valve replacement, or mitral valve repair with/without coronary 
artery bypass grafting, or isolated coronary artery bypass grafting. A composite 
end-point of infection, stroke, acute renal failure, or death was evaluated. Age,
sex, surgical priority, and procedure were forced, a priori, into the model and
then stepwise selection of candidate variables was utilized. Model performance
was evaluated by concordance statistic, Hosmer-Lemeshow Goodness of Fit, and
calibration plots. Bootstrap technique was employed to validate the model.
RESULTS: The model included 16 variables. Several variables were significant such
as, emergent surgical priority (OR 4.3; 95% CI 2.9-7.4), CABG + Valve procedure
(OR 2.3; 95% CI 1.8-3.0), and frailty (OR 1.7; 95% CI 1.2-2.5), among others. The
concordance statistic for the major adverse cardiac events model in a mixed
population was 0.764 (95% CL; 0.75-0.79) and had excellent calibration.
CONCLUSIONS: Development of predictive models with composite end-points and mixed
procedure population can yield robust statistical and clinical validity. As they 
more accurately reflect current cardiac surgical profile, models such as this,
are an essential tool in quality improvement efforts.

DOI: 10.1186/1749-8090-8-177 
PMCID: PMC3751077
PMID: 23899075  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Life Sci. 2013 Sep 3;93(8):329-37. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2013.07.004. Epub 2013 Jul 
17.

Combined effects of aging and in vitro non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs on
kidney and liver mitochondrial physiology.

Rocha-Rodrigues S(1), Santos-Alves E, Coxito PM, Marques-Aleixo I, Passos E,
Guimarães JT, Martins MJ, Oliveira PJ, Magalhães J, Ascensão A.

Author information: 
(1)Research Centre in Physical Activity, Health and Leisure, Faculty of Sport,
University of Porto, Portugal.

AIMS: Aging and drug-induced side effects may contribute to deteriorate
mitochondrial bioenergetics in many tissues, including kidney and liver. One
possibility is that the combination of both aging and drug toxicity accelerates
the process of mitochondrial degradation, leading to progressive bioenergetic
disruption. We therefore analyzed in vitro kidney (KM) and liver (LM)
mitochondrial response to salicylate and diclofenac in old and adult animals.
MAIN METHODS: Male-Wistar adult (19-wks) and aged (106-wks) rats were used. In
vitro endpoints of oxygen consumption and membrane potential were evaluated in
non-treated conditions (vehicle) and in the presence of salicylate (0.5mM) and
diclofenac (50μM). The susceptibility to calcium-induced permeability transition 
pore (MPTP) was assessed. Aconitase and C, -SH and MDA contents were measured.
Apoptotic signaling was followed by measuring caspase 3, 8 and 9 activities, Bax,
Bcl2 and CypD expression. ANT content was semi-quantified.
KEY FINDINGS: In general, animal age alone compromised KM state 3 and LM ADP lag 
phase while resulting in decreased resistance to the MPTP. Aging decreased LM
CypD and increased Mn-SOD. Kidney caspase 9-like activity was lower in aged
group. Salicylate and diclofenac induced KM and LM dysfunction. ADP lag phase in 
KM was further increased in the aged group in the presence of diclofenac. No
further impairments were observed regarding drug toxicity adding to the aging
process.
SIGNIFICANCE: Aging impaired KM and LM function despite no detected alterations
on oxidative stress and apoptosis. However, aging did not further exacerbate KM
and LM frailty induced by salicylate and diclofenac.

© 2013.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lfs.2013.07.004 
PMID: 23872100  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Z Rheumatol. 2013 Aug;72(6):530-8. doi: 10.1007/s00393-012-1115-4.

[Multimorbidity in elderly rheumatic patients part 1].

[Article in German]

Lakomek HJ(1), Brabant T, Lakomek M, Lüttje D.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik für Rheumatologie, physikalische Medizin und Geriatrie, Johannes
Wesling Klinikum Minden, Hans-Nolte-Str. 1, 32429, Minden, Deutschland.

An appropriate treatment of elderly rheumatic patients implements comprehensive
diagnostics and exclusion diagnostics of e.g. coronary heart disease,
osteoporosis, renal failure, diabetes mellitus type 2 and thyroid gland
dysfunction. Furthermore, the complex disease situation might require the
integration of other faculties or might be a reason for inpatient treatment. The 
complexity in the treatment of multimorbid elderly patients suffering from
rheumatism not only rises with increasing age but also constitutes a considerable
challenge due to existing incapacities and preceding as well as currently
performed immunosuppressive therapies. The necessary treatment framework is
outlined from the perspective of rheumatologists and geriatricians. Typical
geriatric symptoms, such as malnutrition, immobility and frailty might be
enhanced if multimorbidity is simultaneously present.

DOI: 10.1007/s00393-012-1115-4 
PMID: 23868730  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


366. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2014 May;147(5):1529-39. doi:
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2013.05.039. Epub 2013 Jul 13.

Different impact of sex on baseline characteristics and major periprocedural
outcomes of transcatheter and surgical aortic valve interventions: Results of the
multicenter Italian OBSERVANT Registry.

Onorati F(1), D'Errigo P(2), Barbanti M(3), Rosato S(2), Covello RD(4),
Maraschini A(2), Ranucci M(5), Santoro G(6), Tamburino C(3), Grossi C(7), Santini
F(8), Menicanti L(5), Seccareccia F(2); OBSERVANT Research Group.

Collaborators: Seccareccia F, D'Errigo P, Rosato S, Maraschini A, Badoni G,
Tamburino C, Santoro G, Santini F, Grossi C, Ranucci M, Milanese S, Covello RD,
Fusco D, De Palma R, Scondotto S, Tamburino C, Barbanti M, Santini F, Onorati F, 
Milanese S, Covello RD, Orlando A, Copello F, Zanier L, Zocchetti C, Cecchi M,
Borgia P, Celentano E, Mauro A, De Luca G, Marchetta F, Antonelli A, Porcu R,
Marra S, D'Amico M, Gaita F, Moretti C, De Benedictis M, Aranzulla T, Pistis G,
Reale M, Bedogni F, Brambilla N, Colombo A, Chieffo A, Ferrari A, Inglese L,
Casilli F, Ettori F, Frontini M, Antona C, Piccaluga E, Klugmann S, De Marco F,
Tespili M, Saino A, Maria S, Isabella G, Fraccaro C, Proclemer A, Bisceglia T,
Armellini I, Vischi M, Parodi E, Petronio S, Giannini C, Pierli C, Iadanza A,
Santoro G, Meucci F, Tomai F, Ghini A, Sardella G, Mancone M, Ribichini F,
Vassanelli C, Dandale R, Giudice P, Vigorito F, Bortone A, De Luca Tupputi
Schinosa L, De Cillis E, Indolfi C, Spaccarotella C, Stabile A, Gandolfo C,
Emanuele V, Tamburino C, Ussia G, Rinaldi M, Salizzoni S, Grossi C, Di Gregorio
O, Arrigo C, Scoti P, Costa R, Casabona R, Del Ponte S, Panisi P, Spira G, Troise
G, Messina A, Viganò M, Aiello M, Alfieri O, Denti P, Menicanti L, Agnelli B,
Muneretto C, Frontini M, Rambaldini M, Frontini, Gamba A, Tasca G, Ferrazzi P,
Terzi A, Antona C, Gelpi G, Martinelli L, Bruschi G, Chiara S, Graffigna A,
Mazzucco A, Pappalardo A, Gatti G, Livi U, Pompei E, Parodi E, Bortolotti U,
Pratali S, Stefano P, Blanzola C, Glauber M, Cerillo A, Chiaramonti F, Pardini A,
Fioriello F, Torracca L, Rescigno G, De Paulis R, Nardella S, Musumeci F, Luzi G,
Possati G, Bonalumi G, Covino E, Pollari F, Sinatra R, Roscitano A, Chiariello L,
Nardi P, Lonobile T, Baldascino F, Di Benedetto G, Mastrogiovanni G, Piazza L,
Marmo J, Vosa C, De Amicis V, Fazzi V, Villani M, Pano M, Cassese M, Antonazzo A,
Patanè L, Gentile M, Tribastone S, Follis F, Montalbano G, Pilato M, Stringi V,
Patanè F, Salamone G, Ruvolo G, Pisano C, Mignosa C, Bivona A, Cirio E, Lixi G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiac Surgery, University of Verona Medical School, Verona,
Italy. Electronic address: frankono@libero.it.
(2)National Centre for Epidemiology, Surveillance and Health Promotion, Istituto 
Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy.
(3)Division of Cardiology, Ferrarotto Hospital, University of Catania, Catania,
and ETNA Foundation, Catania, Italy.
(4)IRCCS Department of Anesthesia & Intensive Care, San Raffaele, Milan, Italy.
(5)Department of Cardiothoracic and Vascular Anesthesia, Intensive Care Unit and 
Department of Cardiac Surgery, IRCCS Policlinico San Donato, San Donato Milanese,
Milan, Italy.
(6)Division of Cardiology, Careggi Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(7)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, S. Croce e Carle Hospital, Cuneo, Italy.
(8)Division of Cardiac Surgery, University of Verona Medical School, Verona,
Italy.

BACKGROUND: Despite the widespread use of transcatheter aortic valve implantation
(TAVI), the role of sex on outcome after TAVI or surgical aortic valve
replacement (AVR) has been poorly investigated. We investigated the impact of sex
on outcome after TAVI or AVR.
METHODS: There were 2108 patients undergoing TAVI or AVR who were enrolled in the
Italian Observational Multicenter Registry (OBSERVANT). Thirty-day mortality,
major periprocedural morbidity, and transprosthetic gradients were stratified by 
sex according to interventions.
RESULTS: Female AVR patients showed a worse risk profile compared with male AVR
patients, given the higher mean age, prevalence of frailty score of 2 or higher, 
New York Heart Association class of 3 or higher, lower body weight, and
preoperative hemoglobin level (P ≤ .02). Similarly, female TAVI patients had a
different risk profile than male TAVI patients, given a higher age and a lower
body weight and preoperative hemoglobin level (P ≤ .005), but with a similar New 
York Heart Association class, frailty score, EuroSCORE (P = NS), a better left
ventricular ejection fraction and a lower prevalence of left ventricular ejection
fraction less than 30%, porcelain aorta, renal dysfunction, chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, arteriopathy, and previous cardiovascular surgery or
percutaneous coronary intervention (P ≤ .01). Women showed a smaller aortic
annulus than men in both populations (P < .001). Female sex was an independent
predictor in the AVR population for risk-adjusted 30-day mortality (odds ratio
[OR], 2.34; P = .043) and transfusions (OR, 1.47; P = .003), but not for
risk-adjusted acute myocardial infarction, stroke, vascular complications,
permanent atrioventricular block (P = NS). Female sex was an independent
predictor in the TAVI population for risk-adjusted major vascular complications
(OR, 2.92; P = .018) and transfusions (OR, 1.93; P = .003), but proved protective
against moderate to severe postprocedural aortic insufficiency (P = .018).
CONCLUSIONS: Female sex is a risk factor for mortality after aortic valve
replacement, for major vascular complications after TAVI, and for transfusions
after both approaches.

Copyright © 2014 The American Association for Thoracic Surgery. Published by
Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2013.05.039 
PMID: 23856202  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Circ Res. 2013 Jul 5;113(2):223-37. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.111.300084.

Current management of calcific aortic stenosis.

Lindman BR(1), Bonow RO, Otto CM.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
MO, USA.

Calcific aortic stenosis is a progressive disease with no effective medical
therapy that ultimately requires aortic valve replacement (AVR) for severe valve 
obstruction. Echocardiography is the primary diagnostic approach to define valve 
anatomy, measure aortic stenosis severity, and evaluate the left ventricular
response to chronic pressure overload. In asymptomatic patients, markers of
disease progression include the degree of leaflet calcification, hemodynamic
severity of stenosis, adverse left ventricular remodeling, reduced left
ventricular longitudinal strain, myocardial fibrosis, and pulmonary hypertension.
The onset of symptoms portends a predictably high mortality rate unless AVR is
performed. In symptomatic patients, AVR improves symptoms, improves survival,
and, in patients with left ventricular dysfunction, improves systolic function.
Poor outcomes after AVR are associated with low-flow low-gradient aortic
stenosis, severe ventricular fibrosis, oxygen-dependent lung disease, frailty,
advanced renal dysfunction, and a high comorbidity score. However, in most
patients with severe symptoms, AVR is lifesaving. Bioprosthetic valves are
recommended for patients aged >65 years. Transcatheter AVR is now available for
patients with severe comorbidities, is recommended in patients who are deemed
inoperable, and is a reasonable alternative to surgical AVR in high-risk
patients.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.111.300084 
PMCID: PMC4013234
PMID: 23833296  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Am J Kidney Dis. 2013 Nov;62(5):919-28. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2013.05.004. Epub
2013 Jun 28.

RBC transfusions among hemodialysis patients (1999-2010): influence of hemoglobin
concentrations below 10 g/dL.

Gilbertson DT(1), Monda KL, Bradbury BD, Collins AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Chronic Disease Research Group, Minneapolis Medical Research Foundation,
Minneapolis, MN. Electronic address: dgilbertson@cdrg.org.

Comment in
    Am J Kidney Dis. 2013 Nov;62(5):874-6.

BACKGROUND: Changes in anemia management over the past decade have produced
downward shifts in hemoglobin concentrations. We aimed to examine the effect on
use of red blood cell (RBC) transfusions.
STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective cohort study.
SETTING & PARTICIPANTS: We identified point prevalent Medicare hemodialysis
patients as of January 1 of each year (1999-2010) and categorized them based on
3-month (April to June) mean hemoglobin levels (<10 or ≥10 g/dL) in each year.
PREDICTORS: Hemoglobin patterns over time and clinical profiles based on achieved
hemoglobin concentrations.
OUTCOMES: RBC transfusion use.
MEASUREMENTS: We used negative binomial modeling to examine the effect of
hemoglobin level <10 g/dL on transfusion use, adjusting for case-mix differences.
RESULTS: Proportions of patients with mean hemoglobin levels <10 g/dL decreased
from 10% (1999) to ~4% (2005), but began increasing after 2006 and reached 6% by 
2010. Accounting for case-mix differences, transfusion rates remained relatively 
constant at approximately 7.9 per 100 person-months for patients with hemoglobin 
levels <10 g/dL and 2 per 100 person-months for patients with hemoglobin levels
≥10 g/dL. Patients with average hemoglobin levels <10 g/dL were more likely to
receive transfusions (risk ratio, 2.2; 95% CI, 2.1-2.2) even after adjustment;
the risk ratio doubled if hemoglobin levels remained <10 g/dL for 6 months (4.4; 
95% CI, 3.7-5.2).
LIMITATIONS: Limited in generalizability to patients with Medicare as primary
payer; residual confounding from factors such as frailty and chronic inflammation
cannot be excluded; categorizing patients based on an average of 3 outpatient
hemoglobin measurements may introduce some misclassification.
CONCLUSIONS: Risk of transfusion increases substantially with hemoglobin
concentrations <10 g/dL; risk appears to be independent of other clinical
factors. If anemia management patterns shift toward lower hemoglobin
concentrations, RBC transfusion use likely will increase in dialysis patients.

Copyright © 2013 National Kidney Foundation, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2013.05.004 
PMID: 23815986  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Clin Calcium. 2013 Jul;23(7):1007-12. doi: CliCa130710071012.

[Bone structural properties and bone strength in CKD].

[Article in Japanese]

Yano S(1), Sugimoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Shimane University Faculty of Medicine,
Japan.

Bone fracture risk in patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) is much higher
than that in healthy subjects. Frailty caused by neuromuscular impairment as well
as bone fragility due to bone loss and impaired bone quality is thought to be
involved in the elevated fracture risk in CKD. Altered material and structural
properties might be attributed to the reduced bone strength. The structural
properties in CKD patients are characterized in 1) cortical thinning and cortical
porosity, and 2) irregular thickening and loss of connectivity in trabecular
bone. Interestingly, recent findings suggest that skeletal changes in the
structural properties may be initiated at earlier stage of CKD than we expected.

DOI: CliCa130710071012 
PMID: 23811589  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2013 Aug;8(8):1421-8. doi: 10.2215/CJN.12121112. Epub 2013
Jun 20.

Considerations in starting a patient with advanced frailty on dialysis: complex
biology meets challenging ethics.

Swidler M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Geriatrics/Palliative Medicine, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA. mark.swidler@mssm.edu

Nephrologists have focused on the uremic syndrome as an indication for dialysis. 
The elderly frail renal patient approaching ESRD represents a complex biologic
system that is already failing. This patient phenotype exhibits progressive
geriatric disabilities and dependence interspersed with shrinking periods of
stability regardless of whether dialysis is started. Consequently, the frail
renal patient faces challenging treatment choices underpinned by ethical
tensions. Identifying the advanced frail renal patient and optimizing the shared 
decision-making process will enable him or her to make well informed choices
based on an understanding of his or her overall condition and personal values and
preferences. This approach will also permit nephrologists to fulfill their
ethical obligations to respect patient autonomy, promote patient benefit, and
minimize patient harm.

DOI: 10.2215/CJN.12121112 
PMCID: PMC3731917
PMID: 23788617  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Arch Cardiovasc Dis. 2013 May;106(5):303-23. doi: 10.1016/j.acvd.2013.04.001.
Epub 2013 May 29.

Expert consensus of the French Society of Geriatrics and Gerontology and the
French Society of Cardiology on the management of atrial fibrillation in elderly 
people.

Hanon O(1), Assayag P, Belmin J, Collet JP, Emeriau JP, Fauchier L, Forette F,
Friocourt P, Gentric A, Leclercq C, Komajda M, Le Heuzey JY; French Society of
Geriatrics and Gerantology; French Society of Cardiology.

Author information: 
(1)Société française de gériatrie et gérontologie, Suresnes, France; AP-HP,
hôpital Broca, service de gérontologie, Paris, France. Olivier.hanon@brc.aphp.fr

Atrial fibrillation (AF) is a common and serious condition in the elderly. AF
affects between 600,000 and one million patients in France, two-thirds of whom
are aged above 75 years. AF is a predictive factor for mortality in the elderly
and a major risk factor for stroke. Co-morbidities are frequent and worsen the
prognosis. The management of AF in the elderly should involve a comprehensive
geriatric assessment (CGA), which analyses both medical and psychosocial
elements, enabling evaluation of the patient's functional status and social
situation and the identification of co-morbidities. The CGA enables the detection
of "frailty" using screening tools assessing cognitive function, risk of falls,
nutritional status, mood disorders, autonomy and social environment. The
objectives of AF treatment in the elderly are to prevent AF complications,
particularly stroke, and improve quality of life. Specific precautions for
treatment must be taken because of the co-morbidities and age-related changes in 
pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics. Preventing AF complications relies mainly
on anticoagulant therapy. Anticoagulants are recommended in patients with AF aged
75 years or above after assessing the bleeding risk using the HEMORR2HAGES or
HAS-BLED scores. Novel oral anticoagulants (NOACs) are promising treatments,
especially due to a lower risk of intracerebral haemorrhage. However, their
prescriptions should take into account renal function (creatinine clearance
assessed with Cockcroft formula) and cognitive function (for adherence to
treatment). Studies including frail patients in "real life" are necessary to
evaluate tolerance of NOACs. Management of AF also involves the treatment of
underlying cardiomyopathy and heart rate control rather than a rhythm-control
strategy as first-line therapy for elderly patients, especially if they are
paucisymptomatic. Antiarrhythmic drugs should be used carefully in elderly
patients because of the frequency of metabolic abnormalities and higher risk of
drug interactions and bradycardia.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.acvd.2013.04.001 
PMID: 23769405  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2013 Aug;8(8):1349-57. doi: 10.2215/CJN.11151012. Epub
2013 May 30.

Association between genotype and phenotype in uromodulin-associated kidney
disease.

Moskowitz JL(1), Piret SE, Lhotta K, Kitzler TM, Tashman AP, Velez E, Thakker RV,
Kotanko P.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Research Institute, 207 East 94th Street, New York, NY 10128, USA.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Uromodulin-associated kidney disease (UAKD) is an
autosomal dominant disease caused by uromodulin (UMOD) gene mutations. This study
explored genotype-phenotype correlations by examining the relationship between
the type of UMOD mutation and the age at onset of ESRD.
DESIGN, SETTING, PARTICIPANTS & MEASUREMENTS: Extensive bibliographic research
was used to ascertain patient-level data of all patients with UAKD published up
to October 2011. Data included sex; ages at onset of hyperuricemia, gout, and
ESRD; and UMOD genotype. Kaplan-Meier analysis and Cox proportional hazards
models fitted with shared gamma frailty terms to adjust for within-family
correlations were used to model time to event.
RESULTS: Thirty-one peer-reviewed publications reporting on 202 patients from 74 
families with 59 different UMOD mutations were included. Median ages at onset of 
hyperuricemia, gout, and ESRD were 24, 40, and 56 years, respectively. Men
developed gout and ESRD significantly earlier than did women (age at ESRD was 50 
years for men and 60 for women; P=0.04, shared frailty model). Median ages at
ESRD development were lowest with Cys77Tyr (37.5 years) and highest with
Gln316Pro (65.5 years) UMOD mutations. Onset of ESRD was significantly earlier
with UMOD mutations located within the epidermal growth factor domains 2 and 3
(range, 45-52 years; P<0.01 and 0.04, respectively) compared with the
cysteine-rich domains (range, 60-65 years; by shared frailty model).
CONCLUSIONS: The UMOD genotype is related to the clinical phenotype of UAKD. This
finding may assist in counseling of patients.

DOI: 10.2215/CJN.11151012 
PMCID: PMC3731914
PMID: 23723338  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Cardiovasc Diabetol. 2013 May 30;12:81. doi: 10.1186/1475-2840-12-81.

Management of hyperglycemia in type 2 diabetes: evidence and uncertainty.

Esposito K(1), Gentile S, Candido R, De Micheli A, Gallo M, Medea G, Ceriello A; 
Associazione Medici Diabetologi.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Second University of Naples,
Naples, Italy. katherine.esposito@unina2.it

The panoply of treatment algorithms, periodically released to improve guidance,
is one mean to face therapeutic uncertainty in pharmacological management of
hyperglycemia in type 2 diabetes, especially after metformin failure. Failure of 
recent guidelines to give advice on the use of specific antidiabetic drugs in
patients with co-morbidity may generate further uncertainty, given the frequent
association of type 2 diabetes with common comorbidity, including, although not
limited to obesity, cardiovascular disease, impaired renal function, and frailty.
The Italian Association of Diabetologists (Associazione Medici Diabetologi, AMD) 
recognized the need to develop personalized treatment plans for people with type 
2 diabetes, taking into account the patients' individual profile (phenotype),
with the objective of the safest possible glycemic control. As not every subject 
with type 2 diabetes benefits from intensive glycemic control, flexible regimens 
of treatment with diabetes drugs (including insulin) are needed for reaching
individualized glycemic goals. Whether personalized diabetology will improve the 
quality healthcare practice of diabetes management is unknown, but specific
research has been launched.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2840-12-81 
PMCID: PMC3669612
PMID: 23721170  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


374. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2013 Jun;61(6):896-901. doi: 10.1111/jgs.12266. Epub 2013 May
27.

Frailty as a novel predictor of mortality and hospitalization in individuals of
all ages undergoing hemodialysis.

McAdams-DeMarco MA(1), Law A, Salter ML, Boyarsky B, Gimenez L, Jaar BG, Walston 
JD, Segev DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

OBJECTIVES: To quantify the prevalence of frailty in adults of all ages
undergoing chronic hemodialysis, its relationship to comorbidity and disability, 
and its association with adverse outcomes of mortality and hospitalization.
DESIGN: Prospective cohort study.
SETTING: Single hemodialysis center in Baltimore, Maryland.
PARTICIPANTS: One hundred forty-six individuals undergoing hemodialysis enrolled 
between January 2009 and March 2010 and followed through August 2012.
MEASUREMENTS: Frailty, comorbidity, and disability on enrollment in the study and
subsequent mortality and hospitalizations.
RESULTS: At enrollment, 50.0% of older (≥ 65) and 35.4% of younger (<65)
individuals undergoing hemodialysis were frail; 35.9% and 29.3%, respectively,
were intermediately frail. Three-year mortality was 16.2% for nonfrail, 34.4% for
intermediately frail, and 40.2% for frail participants. Intermediate frailty and 
frailty were associated with a 2.7 times (95% confidence interval (CI) =
1.02-7.07, P = .046) and 2.6 times (95% CI = 1.04-6.49, P = .04) greater risk of 
death independent of age, sex, comorbidity, and disability. In the year after
enrollment, median number of hospitalizations was 1 (interquartile range 0-3).
The proportion with two or more hospitalizations was 28.2% for nonfrail, 25.5%
for intermediately frail, and 42.6% for frail participants. Although intermediate
frailty was not associated with number of hospitalizations (relative risk = 0.76,
95% CI = 0.49-1.16, P = .21), frailty was associated with 1.4 times (95% CI =
1.00-2.03, P = .049) more hospitalizations independent of age, sex, comorbidity, 
and disability. The association between frailty and mortality (interaction P =
.64) and hospitalizations (P = .14) did not differ between older and younger
participants.
CONCLUSIONS: Adults of all ages undergoing hemodialysis have a high prevalence of
frailty, more than five times as high as community-dwelling older adults. In this
population, regardless of age, frailty is a strong, independent predictor of
mortality and number of hospitalizations.

© 2013, Copyright the Authors Journal compilation © 2013, The American Geriatrics
Society.

DOI: 10.1111/jgs.12266 
PMCID: PMC3938084
PMID: 23711111  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Osteoporos Int. 2013 Dec;24(12):2993-3000. doi: 10.1007/s00198-013-2389-3. Epub
2013 May 24.

Albuminuria is associated with hip fracture risk in older adults: the
cardiovascular health study.

Barzilay JI(1), Bůžková P, Chen Z, de Boer IH, Carbone L, Rassouli NN, Fink HA,
Robbins JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Kaiser Permanente of Georgia, Atlanta, GA, USA,
joshua.barzilay@kp.org.

The microcirculation plays an important role in bone health. Here, we examine
whether albuminuria, a marker of renal microvascular disease, is associated with 
the risk of hip fracture in older adults (age, 78 years). We find a small
independent association in women but not in men.INTRODUCTION: The microvascular
circulation plays an important role in bone physiology. Two studies of
middle-aged adults have found that albuminuria (>30 mg albumin/g creatinine), a
disorder of the renal microvasculature, is associated with fracture risk. Here,
we examine whether albuminuria is related to hip fracture risk and reduced hip
bone mineral density (BMD) in older adults with a mean age of 78 years.
METHODS: From the Cardiovascular Health Study (41 % male), 3,110 adults with
albuminuria testing were followed up for incident hip fracture for up to
9.5 years. BMD was performed in a subset of 1,208 participants.
RESULTS: There were 313 hip fractures during follow-up (7.7 % of men; 11.7 % of
women). The incidence rate for men, with and without albuminuria, was 1.43 and
0.93/100 person-years of follow-up (p = 0.02); for women, 1.84 and 1.33
(p = 0.04). After adjustment for osteoporosis-related factors, frailty and
falling, a doubling of albuminuria was significantly associated with hip fracture
risk in women (hazard ratio, 1.12, 95 % CI, 1.001-1.25), but not in men. In the
subcohort with BMD measurement, increased urine albumin levels were significantly
associated with decreased total hip BMD in men (-0.009 g calcium/cm(2) (-0.017,
-0.001); p = 0.04), but not in women.
CONCLUSIONS: In older women, albuminuria is associated with a small, but
statistically significant, increased risk of hip fracture independent of other
explanatory factors. No such risk appears to be present in men, although their
total hip BMD is lower in association with albuminuria.

DOI: 10.1007/s00198-013-2389-3 
PMCID: PMC4504691
PMID: 23702700  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


376. J Ren Care. 2013 Jun;39(2):96-102. doi: 10.1111/j.1755-6686.2013.12013.x. Epub
2013 May 14.

Role of components of frailty on quality of life in dialysis patients: a
cross-sectional study.

Sclauzero P(1), Galli G, Barbati G, Carraro M, Panzetta GO.

Author information: 
(1)S.C. Nefrologia e Dialisi, AOU Ospedali Riuniti, Trieste, Italy.
paola.sclauzero@aots.sanita.fvg.it

BACKGROUND: Many people on dialysis suffer a variety of conditions that can
affect frailty (the condition or quality of being frail), such as comorbidities, 
disabilities, dependence, malnutrition, cognitive impairment and poor social
conditions. Frailty is suspected to affect quality of life (QoL).
OBJECTIVES: The study aimed to evaluate the effect of the different components of
frailty on the QoL of people on dialysis.
METHODS: We enrolled 203 out of 233 prevalent patients on dialysis in the Trieste
area of Italy. We applied the Short-Form 36 (SF-36) questionnaire, Activities of 
Daily Living, Instrumental Activities of Daily Living, Subjective Global
Assessment scales and Karnofsky Index. In addition we analysed their social
conditions.
RESULTS: Dependence, malnutrition and disability had a negative role on QoL.
Living with family and good social-economic conditions were significantly related
to a better QoL.
CONCLUSIONS: Dependence, malnutrition, disability, poor social and economic
conditions have a significant effect on life quality. The role of comorbidities
appears to be less important. Screening of patients, nutritional and functional
rehabilitation and prevention of social isolation appear to be indispensable in
guaranteeing a satisfactory life quality.

© 2013 European Dialysis and Transplant Nurses Association/European Renal Care
Association.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1755-6686.2013.12013.x 
PMID: 23672651  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Biometrics. 2013 Jun;69(2):366-74. doi: 10.1111/biom.12025. Epub 2013 May 7.

An estimating function approach to the analysis of recurrent and terminal events.

Kalbfleisch JD(1), Schaubel DE, Ye Y, Gong Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2029,
USA. jdkalbfl@umich.edu

In clinical and observational studies, the event of interest can often recur on
the same subject. In a more complicated situation, there exists a terminal event 
(e.g., death) which stops the recurrent event process. In many such instances,
the terminal event is strongly correlated with the recurrent event process. We
consider the recurrent/terminal event setting and model the dependence through a 
shared gamma frailty that is included in both the recurrent event rate and
terminal event hazard functions. Conditional on the frailty, a model is specified
only for the marginal recurrent event process, hence avoiding the strong
Poisson-type assumptions traditionally used. Analysis is based on estimating
functions that allow for estimation of covariate effects on the recurrent event
rate and terminal event hazard. The method also permits estimation of the degree 
of association between the two processes. Closed-form asymptotic variance
estimators are proposed. The proposed method is evaluated through simulations to 
assess the applicability of the asymptotic results in finite samples and the
sensitivity of the method to its underlying assumptions. The methods can be
extended in straightforward ways to accommodate multiple types of recurrent and
terminal events. Finally, the methods are illustrated in an analysis of
hospitalization data for patients in an international multi-center study of
outcomes among dialysis patients.

© 2013, The International Biometric Society.

DOI: 10.1111/biom.12025 
PMCID: PMC3692576
PMID: 23651362  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


378. J Ren Nutr. 2013 Sep;23(5):356-62. doi: 10.1053/j.jrn.2013.02.010. Epub 2013 May 
3.

Association of frailty with body composition among patients on hemodialysis.

Delgado C(1), Doyle JW, Johansen KL.

Author information: 
(1)Staff Physician Nephrology Section, San Francisco VA Medical Center, San
Francisco, CA.

Erratum in
    J Ren Nutr. 2015 Jul;25(4):397.

Although sarcopenia is thought to underlie the manifestations of frailty,
association of frailty with measures of body composition is
underinvestigated.METHODS: Eighty hemodialysis patients were included in the
study. Performance-based frailty (PbF) used gait speed over 20 feet and 5
sit-to-stand (1 point each for lowest quintile) for the physical components of
the frailty phenotype plus exhaustion (Short Form-36 [SF-36] vitality score <55) 
and physical activity (lowest quintile of weekly kcal energy expenditure on
leisure activity on the Physical Activity Scale for the Elderly questionnaire; 1 
point). Function-based frailty (FbF) defined by questionnaire measures of
physical functioning (SF-36 Physical Function score <75; 1 point), exhaustion,
and physical activity as for PbF. A score of 2 or greater was defined as frail.
Outcomes related to muscle size included muscle area of the contractile tissue of
the anterior tibialis and quadriceps muscles using magnetic resonance imaging,
phase angle using bioimpedance analysis, lean body mass using dual energy X-ray
absorptiometry, and body mass index (BMI). Linear regression was used to analyze 
associations between frailty and muscle size, with and without sex and age
covariates.
RESULTS: Fifty-nine percent of individuals met PbF criteria, 63% met FbF
criteria, and 55% met both. In univariate analysis, PbF and FbF were associated
with smaller muscle area of the quadriceps, smaller phase angle, and higher BMI. 
Associations remained significant for the quadriceps after adjustment for age and
sex. The magnitude of association of PbF with quadriceps muscle area was greater 
than 10 years of age (-30.3 cm(2)P = .02 vs. -6.6 cm(2)P < .0001) in multivariate
analysis. There was no significant association between either measure of frailty 
and other measures of body composition after adjustment for age and sex.
CONCLUSION: Frailty was associated with measurements related to muscle size in a 
population of individuals with chronic kidney disease, a known contributor to
muscle wasting.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1053/j.jrn.2013.02.010 
PMCID: PMC4384655
PMID: 23648049  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2013 Jul;46(1):124-31. doi: 10.1016/j.ejvs.2013.03.024.
Epub 2013 Apr 28.

Short and long term mortality rates after a lower limb amputation.

Fortington LV(1), Geertzen JH, van Netten JJ, Postema K, Rommers GM, Dijkstra PU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, University of Groningen, University
Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. l.v.fortington@umcg.nl

Comment in
    Acta Orthop. 2016 Jun;87(3):306-11.

OBJECTIVE: To determine mortality rates after a first lower limb amputation and
explore the rates for different subpopulations.
METHODS: Retrospective cohort study of all people who underwent a first
amputation at or proximal to transtibial level, in an area of 1.7 million people.
Analysis with Kaplan-Meier curves and Log Rank tests for univariate associations 
of psycho-social and health variables. Logistic regression for odds of death at
30-days, 1-year and 5-years.
RESULTS: 299 people were included. Median time to death was 20.3 months (95%CI:
13.1; 27.5). 30-day mortality = 22%; odds of death 2.3 times higher in people
with history of cerebrovascular disease (95%CI: 1.2; 4.7, P = 0.016). 1 year
mortality = 44%; odds of death 3.5 times higher for people with renal disease
(95%CI: 1.8; 7.0, P < 0.001). 5-years mortality = 77%; odds of death 5.4 times
higher for people with renal disease (95%CI: 1.8; 16.0,P = 0.003). Variation in
mortality rates was most apparent in different age groups; people 75-84 years
having better short term outcomes than those younger and older.
CONCLUSIONS: Mortality rates demonstrated the frailty of this population, with
almost one quarter of people dying within 30-days, and almost half at 1 year.
People with cerebrovascular had higher odds of death at 30 days, and those with
renal disease and 1 and 5 years, respectively.

Copyright © 2013 European Society for Vascular Surgery. Published by Elsevier
Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejvs.2013.03.024 
PMID: 23628328  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Rev Med Liege. 2013 Mar;68(3):110-7.

[A trans-hospital pilot programme for onco-geriatry. The experience of the
CHC-Liege].

[Article in French]

Focan C(1), Warzee E, Demolin G, Houbiers G, Kreutz F, Matus G, Longree L, Sondag
C, Dammel F, Guillaume T, Graas MP.

Author information: 
(1)Département d'Onco-Hématologie, CHC Clinique Saint-Joseph, Liège, Belgique.
christian.focan@chc.be

The authors offered to 296 consecutive cancer patients aged > or = 70 to undergo 
a joint comprehensive geriatric and oncological assessment. After
pluridisciplinary discussion, several reflections have emerged: the need in 15 - 
32% of cases to reinforce the role of the paramedical staff; the correlation
between age, low clinical indices, alteration of renal function as well as
geriatric characteristics; 67% of evaluated cases presented a significant
geriatric profile; recommendations for patients' management in relation to their 
pattern of frailty and health aging (standard, adapted or palliative treatment).


PMID: 23614318  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Ann Thorac Surg. 2013 May;95(5):e113-4. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2012.10.067.

Late calcific mitral stenosis after MitraClip procedure in a dialysis-dependent
patient.

Pope NH(1), Lim S, Ailawadi G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Virginia Health System, Charlottesville, 
Virginia, USA.

The EVEREST II trial investigated the MitraClip (Abbott Vascular, Menlo Park, CA)
in patients with severe mitral regurgitation (MR) undergoing surgical procedures.
Although mitral stenosis was not reported in this cohort, this trial excluded
patients receiving dialysis. We report a case of a 43-year-old HIV-positive,
dialysis-dependent patient with nonischemic cardiomyopathy and severe MR, who was
considered at high operative risk because of frailty. She was treated with a
MitraClip as part of the REALISM high-risk registry. Her symptomatic MR improved 
but severe symptomatic mitral stenosis developed 28 months after the MitraClip
procedure. At that point, she was felt to be a better operative candidate but
required open mitral valve replacement. Pathologic examination demonstrated
significant calcification of the leaflets around the MitraClip devices.

Copyright © 2013 The Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2012.10.067 
PMCID: PMC4756582
PMID: 23608290  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Arch Gerontol Geriatr. 2013 Nov-Dec;57(3):328-32. doi:
10.1016/j.archger.2013.03.009. Epub 2013 Apr 6.

Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is an independent risk factor for long-term care
insurance (LTCI) need certification among older Japanese adults: a two-year
prospective cohort study.

Yamada M(1), Arai H, Nishiguchi S, Kajiwara Y, Yoshimura K, Sonoda T, Yukutake T,
Kayama H, Tanigawa T, Aoyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Health Sciences, Kyoto University Graduate School of
Medicine, 53 Kawahara-cho, Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.
yamada@hs.med.kyoto-u.ac.jp

CKD is associated with impairments in health status, physical function, and
frailty. The aim of the current prospective cohort study was to determine whether
CKD predicted new LTCI need certification among community-dwelling older Japanese
adults. This was a prospective cohort study. We analyzed the cohort data from a
prospective study, The Japan Multicenter Aging Cohort for Care Prevention
(J-MACC). We followed 8063 elderly adults for 2 years, and we analyzed the
relationship between CKD and LTCI need. The outcome studied was new certification
for LTCI service need during a 2-year period. We measured serum creatinine (the
estimated glomerular filtration rate; eGFR), serum albumin, frailty checklist
scores, and body mass index. During the 2-year follow-up, 536 subjects (6.6%)
were newly certified as needing LTCI services. We stratified the cohort according
to eGFR quartile and performed multivariate analyses using an eGFR value of
71.4-83.6 ml/min/1.73 m(2) as a reference. We found that subjects with eGFR
values <60.0 ml/min/1.73 m(2) had a significantly elevated risk of LTCI service
need (adjusted hazard ratio: 1.44 [95% CI 1.12-1.86]). Our results indicate that 
CKD is independently associated with new LTCI service need certification and is
an important marker of frailty in older adults.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.archger.2013.03.009 
PMID: 23566448  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Expert Opin Drug Metab Toxicol. 2013 May;9(5):573-88. doi:
10.1517/17425255.2013.781153. Epub 2013 Mar 20.

Clinical pharmacokinetics of antiretroviral drugs in older persons.

Schoen JC(1), Erlandson KM, Anderson PL.

Author information: 
(1)University of Colorado, Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Combination antiretroviral therapy has enabled HIV-infected persons
to reach older ages in high numbers. Hepatic and renal changes that normally
occur with advancing age occur earlier and with higher incidence in HIV-infected 
individuals. A limited number of prospective controlled studies have demonstrated
small reductions (17 to 41%) in lopinavir, atazanavir and lamivudine clearance in
older versus younger adults. A much larger number of retrospective studies in
adults (age range ∼ 20 to 60 years), including all antiretroviral drugs, have
evaluated age as a covariate for pharmacokinetics. Most studies did not detect
substantial associations between drug exposures and age.
AREAS COVERED: This review summarizes antiretroviral drug pharmacokinetics in
older persons. The authors review articles from PubMed (search terms: elderly,
antiretroviral, pharmacokinetics) in addition to the bibliographies of those
selected.
EXPERT OPINION: The evidence to date does not support major pharmacokinetic
changes in adults between ∼ 20 and 60 years of age. However, additional
prospective, well-controlled studies are needed in more persons > 60 years,
including those with frailty and comorbidities, with assessment of unbound drug
clearance, and incorporation of adherence, pharmacogenetics and concomitant
medications. Until then, guidelines for drug-drug interactions and dosing in
renal and hepatic impairment should be followed in older HIV-infected
individuals.

DOI: 10.1517/17425255.2013.781153 
PMCID: PMC3673886
PMID: 23514375  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


384. J Ren Nutr. 2013 Mar;23(2):77-90. doi: 10.1053/j.jrn.2013.01.001.

Etiology of the protein-energy wasting syndrome in chronic kidney disease: a
consensus statement from the International Society of Renal Nutrition and
Metabolism (ISRNM).

Carrero JJ(1), Stenvinkel P, Cuppari L, Ikizler TA, Kalantar-Zadeh K, Kaysen G,
Mitch WE, Price SR, Wanner C, Wang AY, ter Wee P, Franch HA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Renal Medicine, Department of Clinical Science, Intervention and
Technology, Karolinska Institutet, Solna, Sweden.

Protein-energy wasting (PEW), a term proposed by the International Society of
Renal Nutrition and Metabolism (ISRNM), refers to the multiple nutritional and
catabolic alterations that occur in chronic kidney disease (CKD) and associate
with morbidity and mortality. To increase awareness, identify research needs, and
provide the basis for future work to understand therapies and consequences of
PEW, ISRNM provides this consensus statement of current knowledge on the etiology
of PEW syndrome in CKD. Although insufficient food intake (true undernutrition)
due to poor appetite and dietary restrictions contribute, other highly prevalent 
factors are required for the full syndrome to develop. These include
uremia-induced alterations such as increased energy expenditure, persistent
inflammation, acidosis, and multiple endocrine disorders that render a state of
hypermetabolism leading to excess catabolism of muscle and fat. In addition,
comorbid conditions associated with CKD, poor physical activity, frailty, and the
dialysis procedure per se further contribute to PEW.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1053/j.jrn.2013.01.001 
PMID: 23428357  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


385. QJM. 2013 Apr;106(4):323-32. doi: 10.1093/qjmed/hcs237. Epub 2013 Jan 22.

Acute kidney injury: outcomes and quality of care.

Aitken E(1), Carruthers C, Gall L, Kerr L, Geddes C, Kingsmore D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Renal Surgery, Western Infirmary, Glasgow G11 6NY, UK.
emmaaitken@nhs.net

BACKGROUND: Deficiencies in management have been highlighted as contributory
factors in the death of many patients with acute kidney injury (AKI). However,
there is little evidence addressing the quality of care provided to patients with
milder AKI.
AIM: The aim of this study is to evaluate the quality of care provided to a
non-select cohort of patients with AKI and evaluate discrepancies in causation,
recognition and management.
DESIGN: Retrospective inception cohort study.
METHODS: Demographic data were collected for all 1577 patients admitted to a
University Teaching Hospital during a 1-month period. Baseline, admission and
peak creatinine were correlated with mortality and length of hospital admission. 
AKI was classified according to Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes
criteria. A retrospective case note review of all patients with AKI was carried
out to evaluate quality of documentation and clinical management of AKI.
Multivariate analysis was undertaken to determine risk factors for AKI.
RESULTS: Incidence of AKI on admission was 4.6%. A further 10.3% developed AKI
while in hospital. All cause mortality was 4-fold higher among patients with AKI 
compared with those without (19 vs. 3.8%; P < 0.001). Mortality was significantly
higher in those patients who developed AKI while an in-patient compared with
those with AKI on admission (27.3 vs. 11.8%; P < 0.001). Diabetes, clinician
perception of frailty, age and treatment with angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitor prior to admission were found to be independent risk factors for AKI.
AKI was unrecognized in 23.5% of patients, two-thirds of whom were discharged
without resolution of renal function. Significant weaknesses in management were
poorly kept fluid balance charts (48.2%), failure to withhold nephrotoxic drugs
(38.8%) and failure to act upon abnormal biochemistry (41%) in a timely fashion.
CONCLUSION: AKI is common in hospitalized patients and associated with a
significant increase in hospital stay and mortality. AKI is often found in
conjunction with other organ failure and in many cases is not preventable.
Nevertheless clinicians need to be more vigilant of small creatinine rises to
permit early intervention particularly among elderly and frail patients.

DOI: 10.1093/qjmed/hcs237 
PMID: 23345468  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


386. JAMA Intern Med. 2013 Jan 14;173(1):79. doi: 10.1001/jamainternmed.2013.1411.

Frailty in dialysis-dependent patients with end-stage renal disease-reply.

Bao Y, Johansen KL.

Comment on
    JAMA Intern Med. 2013 Jan 14;173(1):78-9.

DOI: 10.1001/jamainternmed.2013.1411 
PMID: 23318592  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


387. JAMA Intern Med. 2013 Jan 14;173(1):78-9. doi: 10.1001/2013.jamainternmed.750.

Frailty in dialysis-dependent patients with end-stage renal disease.

Kutner NG, Zhang R.

Comment in
    JAMA Intern Med. 2013 Jan 14;173(1):79.

DOI: 10.1001/2013.jamainternmed.750 
PMID: 23318591  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Am J Kidney Dis. 2013 May;61(5):790-7. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2012.08.049. Epub 2012
Dec 20.

Kidney transplantation in the older adult.

Knoll GA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Kidney Research Centre, Ottawa Hospital Research
Institute, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
gknoll@ottawahospital.on.ca

The end-stage renal disease population is aging. Nearly half of all new patients 
are older than 65 years and one third are older than 70 years. Assessing the
possibility of transplantation for older patients with end-stage renal disease
often involves contemplating more complex issues, including cognitive impairment,
decreased functional status, and frailty, which makes selecting appropriate
candidates more difficult. Older transplant recipients have decreased patient and
transplant survival compared with younger recipients. For example, 75% of
deceased donor transplant recipients aged 30-49 years are alive after 5 years
compared to only 61% for those older than 65 years. Despite poorer outcomes
compared with younger recipients, older transplant recipients have a significant 
improvement in survival compared with similar patients who remain on the wait
list, with decreases in mortality of 41%-61% depending on the study. Use of
living donors, even older living donors, provides significantly better outcomes
for elderly recipients compared with the use of deceased donors. However, in the 
absence of a living donor, survival is improved significantly by accepting an
expanded criteria donor organ rather than waiting for a standard criteria
deceased donor. Older transplant recipients experience more infectious
complications and less acute rejection, but the risk of transplant loss from
rejection is increased compared with younger patients. These immunologic issues, 
along with the fact that older patients often are excluded from transplant
trials, have made selecting an ideal immunosuppressive regimen challenging.
Prospective comparative trials of different agents in the elderly population are 
warranted to better define the risk-benefit profile. This review discusses
transplantation outcomes, including patient and transplant survival, different
donor types, quality of life, and immunosuppression for older dialysis patients.

Copyright © 2013 National Kidney Foundation, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2012.08.049 
PMID: 23261121  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Can Geriatr J. 2011 Dec;14(4):79-92. doi: 10.5770/cgj.v14i4.19. Epub 2011 Dec 12.

Adverse drug events and associated factors in heart failure therapy among the
very elderly.

Sztramko R(1), Chau V, Wong R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Geriatric Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, BC.

INTRODUCTION: Heart failure (HF) is common in older adults and standard therapy
involves the use of multiple medications. We assessed the nature, frequency, and 
factors associated with adverse drug events (ADEs) associated with standard HF
therapy among older adults greater than 75 years of age. The efficacy and
predictors of ADEs were assessed in this patient population, as well.
METHODS: Systematic review using standardized databases including MEDLINE,
Ageline, and CINAHL from January 1st 1988 to January 1st, 2010 and references
from published literature. Randomized trials and studies with observational,
cohort, and cross-sectional design were included. Two investigators independently
selected the studies and extracted the data (kappa = 0.86).
RESULTS: Twenty-five studies were identified. ADEs were reported in 13/23 (57%)
studies. Syncope, bradycardia, and hypotension as a result of beta blockers
occurred in greater frequency compared to younger populations. Spironolactone
therapy resulted in increased rates of hyperkalemia, acute renal failure, and
medication discontinuation. Factors associated with ADEs included advanced age,
poor left ventricular function, and increasing New York Heart Association Class. 
Efficacy of beta blockers and ACE inhibitors appears to extend to the elderly
population, but the magnitude of effect size is unclear. Very few studies
reported associations between ADE and patients' comorbidities (4/13 studies, 31%)
or functional status (3/13 studies, 23%).
CONCLUSION: ADEs in CHF therapy among the very elderly occurred at a greater
frequency, but were generally poorly characterized in the literature despite a
relatively common occurrence. Further studies are warranted.

DOI: 10.5770/cgj.v14i4.19 
PMCID: PMC3516232
PMID: 23251319 


390. Am J Cardiol. 2013 Jan 1;111(1):137-42. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2012.08.060.

Preoperative anxiety as a predictor of mortality and major morbidity in patients 
aged >70 years undergoing cardiac surgery.

Williams JB(1), Alexander KP, Morin JF, Langlois Y, Noiseux N, Perrault LP,
Smolderen K, Arnold SV, Eisenberg MJ, Pilote L, Monette J, Bergman H, Smith PK,
Afilalo J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular and Thoracic Surgery, Department of Surgery, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Cardiol. 2013 Apr 1;111(7):1079.
    Am J Cardiol. 2013 Apr 1;111(7):1079.

The present study examined the association between patient-reported anxiety and
postcardiac surgery mortality and major morbidity. Frailty Assessment Before
Cardiac Surgery was a prospective multicenter cohort study of elderly patients
undergoing cardiac surgery (coronary artery bypass surgery and/or valve repair or
replacement) at 4 tertiary care hospitals from 2008 to 2009. The patients were
evaluated a mean of 2 days preoperatively with the Hospital Anxiety and
Depression Scale, a validated questionnaire assessing depression and anxiety in
hospitalized patients. The primary predictor variable was a high level of
anxiety, defined by a Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale score of ≥ 11. The
main outcome measure was all-cause mortality or major morbidity (e.g., stroke,
renal failure, prolonged ventilation, deep sternal wound infection, or
reoperation) occurring during the index hospitalization. Multivariable logistic
regression analysis examined the association between high preoperative anxiety
and all-cause mortality/major morbidity, adjusting for the Society of Thoracic
Surgeons predicted risk, age, gender, and depression symptoms. A total of 148
patients (mean age 75.8 ± 4.4 years; 34% women) completed the Hospital Anxiety
and Depression Scale. High levels of preoperative anxiety were present in 7% of
patients. No differences were found in the type of surgery and Society of
Thoracic Surgeons predicted risk across the preoperative levels of anxiety. After
adjusting for potential confounders, high preoperative anxiety was remained
independently predictive of postoperative mortality or major morbidity (odds
ratio 5.1, 95% confidence interval 1.3 to 20.2; p = 0.02). In conclusion,
although high levels of anxiety were present in few patients anticipating cardiac
surgery, this conferred a strong and independent heightened risk of mortality or 
major morbidity.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2012.08.060 
PMCID: PMC3677723
PMID: 23245838  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Expert Opin Drug Discov. 2013 Feb;8(2):191-218. doi:
10.1517/17460441.2013.741582. Epub 2012 Dec 12.

Deciphering the selective androgen receptor modulators paradigm.

Zhang X(1), Sui Z.

Author information: 
(1)Janssen Research and Development, LLC, Welsh and McKean Roads, PO Box 776,
Spring House, PA 19477, USA. xzhang5@its.jnj.com

INTRODUCTION: The development and potential clinical use of tissue-selective
androgen receptor modulators (SARMs) have advanced tremendously over the past few
years. A key aspect of SARMs is the ability to clearly differentiate between the 
anabolic and androgenic activities. SARMs provide therapeutic opportunities in a 
variety of diseases, including muscle wasting associated with burns, cancer,
end-stage renal disease, osteoporosis, frailty and hypogonadism.
AREAS COVERED: The aim of the present paper is to summarize the current standing 
of research and development of SARMs and plausible molecular mechanisms
underlying the potential for selective modulation of androgen receptor (AR) by
different ligands. This paper also provides an update on SARM discovery paradigms
for preclinical evaluations.
EXPERT OPINION: Promising results have been obtained in preclinical
investigations and initial clinical trials, but long-term safety, tolerability
and efficacy studies in patients are still necessary. Preclinically, improving
knowledge of tissue selectivity at the molecular level, developing AR selectivity
transcription profile, exploring in vitro/in vivo correlation, along with
expanding selectivity evaluation among more androgen responsive tissues would
accelerate the discovery of a new generation of more selective and safer clinical
candidates, minimize false leads and hasten development of effective approaches
for an expanded range of clinical conditions.

DOI: 10.1517/17460441.2013.741582 
PMID: 23231475  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Ther Adv Urol. 2012 Dec;4(6):303-13. doi: 10.1177/1756287212457216.

Experience with sorafenib in the treatment of advanced renal cell carcinoma.

Procopio G(1), Verzoni E, Testa I, Nicolai N, Salvioni R, Debraud F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Fondazione IRCCS, Istituto Nazionale dei
Tumori, Via G. Venezian, Milan 1-20133, Italy.

The molecular-targeted agent sorafenib is the first anticancer agent able to slow
the progression of advanced/metastatic renal cell carcinoma, a tumor that was
formerly refractory to conventional therapy. Experience from everyday clinical
practice and investigations exploring the suitability of this agent for patients 
with harmful pathological conditions has extended the use of sorafenib to other
settings of renal cell carcinoma and to particular risk populations. The aim of
this review is to provide evidence on the most effective and safe use of
sorafenib. The review pays particular attention to patients who have several
comorbidities, such as impaired renal and cardiac function, and older patients
whose frailty due to impaired organ function necessitates the most careful
administration of targeted antineoplastic agents.

DOI: 10.1177/1756287212457216 
PMCID: PMC3491759
PMID: 23205057 


393. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2013 Jan;28(1):48-54. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfs451. Epub 2012
Nov 8.

Out of control: accelerated aging in uremia.

Kooman JP(1), Broers NJ, Usvyat L, Thijssen S, van der Sande FM, Cornelis T,
Levin NW, Leunissen KM, Kotanko P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Nephrology, University Hospital
Maastricht, Maastricht, the Netherlands. jeroen.kooman@mumc.nl

Next to a high morbidity, patients with end-stage renal failure (ESRD) suffer
from a complex spectrum of clinical manifestations. Both the phenotype of
patients with ESRD as well as the pathophysiology of uremia show interesting
parallels with the general aging process. Phenotypically, patients with ESRD have
an increased susceptibility for both cardiovascular as well as infectious disease
and show a reduction in functional capacity as well as muscular mass
(sarcopenia), translating into a high prevalence of frailty also in younger
patients. Pathophysiologically, the immune dysfunction, telomere attrition and
the presence of low-grade inflammation in uremic patients also show parallels
with the aging process. System models of aging, such as the homeodynamic model
and reliability theory of Gavrilov may also have relevance for ESRD. The
reduction in the redundancy of compensatory mechanisms and the multisystem
impairment in ESRD explain the rapid loss of homeodynamic/homeostatic balance and
the increased susceptibility to external stressors in these patients. System
theories may also explain the relative lack of success of interventions focusing 
on single aspects of renal disease. The concept of accelerated aging, which also 
shares similarities with other organ diseases, may be of relevance both for a
better understanding of the uremic process, as well as for the design of
multidimensional interventions in ESRD patients, including an important role for 
early rehabilitation. Research into processes akin to both aging and uremia may
result in novel therapeutic approaches.

DOI: 10.1093/ndt/gfs451 
PMID: 23139404  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Indian J Nephrol. 2012 May;22(3):217-20. doi: 10.4103/0971-4065.98766.

Rapidly progressive renal failure due to chronic lymphocytic leukemia - Response 
to chlorambucil.

Junglee NA(1), Shrikanth S, Seale JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Ysbyty Gwynedd, Penrhosgarnedd, Bangor, Wales, UK.

Chronic lymphocytic leukemia tends to follow an indolent course and despite
infiltration of leukemic cells in numerous organs, resultant target organ damage 
is uncommon. We present a case of an 83-year-old Caucasian lady who presented
with rapidly worsening renal impairment over a several month period with a serum 
creatinine peak of 2.82 mg/dl. Despite numerous investigations an immediate cause
was not apparent. A renal biopsy was therefore conducted which revealed dense
infiltration of the interstitium with small lymphocytic lymphoma. Given her age
and frailty she was treated with single alkylating agent chemotherapy
(chlorambucil). This resulted in a marked decrease in lymphocyte count and
resolution of renal impairment close to her previous baseline level. To our
knowledge, this is the first case in the literature to demonstrate a marked
resolution in renal impairment with chlorambucil alone. We also highlight the
value of renal biopsy in identifying a rare cause of renal impairment.

DOI: 10.4103/0971-4065.98766 
PMCID: PMC3459529
PMID: 23087560 


395. Ann Oncol. 2013 Feb;24(2):336-42. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mds431. Epub 2012 Oct 9.

Safety and activity of sunitinib in elderly patients (≥ 70 years) with metastatic
renal cell carcinoma: a multicenter study.

Brunello A(1), Basso U, Sacco C, Sava T, De Vivo R, Camerini A, Barile C, Roma A,
Maruzzo M, Falci C, Zagonel V.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Medical Oncology 1, Istituto Oncologico Veneto-IOV, IRCCS Padova,
Italy. antonella.brunello@ioveneto.it

BACKGROUND: Actual tolerability of sunitinib is still poorly documented in
elderly patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma (mRCC).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Charts of elderly patients treated with sunitinib for mRCC 
were reviewed in six Italian centers to assess safety (primary objective),
efficacy and correlation of toxicity with comprehensive geriatric assessment
(CGA) (secondary objectives).
RESULTS: Sixty-eight patients were eligible, and the median age was 74 years. CGA
was carried out in 34 patients (41% fit, 41% vulnerable and 18.5% frail). The
dose reduction to 37.5 mg was made upfront or soon after the first cycle in
69.1%. More frequent toxic effects were fatigue (80.9%), mucositis (61.8%) and
hypertension (58.8%). Cardiac events occurred in nine patients. In 10 patients,
therapy was interrupted early due to rapidly progressive disease (10.3%) or
severe toxicity (4.4%: 1 cardiac failure, 1 fatigue, 1 febrile neutropenia). At a
median follow-up of 27.1 months, the median OS was 18.3 months and the median PFS
was 13.6 months. Correlation was not found between frailty at CGA with severe
toxicity nor with response.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with sunitinib is effective in elderly patients; yet early
interruptions were frequent. Starting treatment at reduced dose and escalating in
the absence of severe toxicity could be suggested.

DOI: 10.1093/annonc/mds431 
PMID: 23051952  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Circulation. 2012 Oct 16;126(16):1964-71. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.112.113944.
Epub 2012 Sep 13.

Association of mild to moderate chronic kidney disease with venous
thromboembolism: pooled analysis of five prospective general population cohorts.

Mahmoodi BK(1), Gansevoort RT, Næss IA, Lutsey PL, Brækkan SK, Veeger NJ, Brodin 
EE, Meijer K, Sang Y, Matsushita K, Hallan SI, Hammerstrøm J, Cannegieter SC,
Astor BC, Coresh J, Folsom AR, Hansen JB, Cushman M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Circulation. 2012 Oct 16;126(16):1937-8.

BACKGROUND: Recent findings suggest that chronic kidney disease (CKD) may be
associated with an increased risk of venous thromboembolism (VTE). Given the high
prevalence of mild-to-moderate CKD in the general population, in depth analysis
of this association is warranted.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We pooled individual participant data from 5 community-based
cohorts from Europe (second Nord-Trøndelag Health Study [HUNT2], Prevention of
Renal and Vascular End-stage Disease [PREVEND], and the Tromsø study) and the
United States (Atherosclerosis Risks in Communities [ARIC] and Cardiovascular
Health Study [CHS]) to assess the association of estimated glomerular filtration 
rate (eGFR), albuminuria, and CKD with objectively verified VTE. To estimate
adjusted hazard ratios for VTE, categorical and continuous spline models were fit
by using Cox regression with shared-frailty or random-effect meta-analysis. A
total of 1178 VTE events occurred over 599 453 person-years follow-up. Relative
to eGFR 100 mL/min per 1.73 m(2), hazard ratios for VTE were 1.29 (95% confidence
interval, 1.04-1.59) for eGFR 75, 1.31 (1.00-1.71) for eGFR 60, 1.82 (1.27-2.60) 
for eGFR 45, and 1.95 (1.26-3.01) for eGFR 30 mL/min per 1.73 m(2). In comparison
with an albumin-to-creatinine ratio (ACR) of 5.0 mg/g, the hazard ratios for VTE 
were 1.34 (1.04-1.72) for ACR 30 mg/g, 1.60 (1.08-2.36) for ACR 300 mg/g, and
1.92 (1.19-3.09) for ACR 1000 mg/g. There was no interaction between clinical
categories of eGFR and ACR (P=0.20). The adjusted hazard ratio for CKD, defined
as eGFR <60 mL/min per 1.73 m(2) or albuminuria ≥30 mg/g, (versus no CKD) was
1.54 (95% confidence interval, 1.15-2.06). Associations were consistent in
subgroups according to age, sex, and comorbidities, and for unprovoked versus
provoked VTE, as well.
CONCLUSIONS: Both eGFR and ACR are independently associated with increased risk
of VTE in the general population, even across the normal eGFR and ACR ranges.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.112.113944 
PMCID: PMC3520022
PMID: 22977129  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


397. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2012 Dec;67(12):1379-86. doi:
10.1093/gerona/gls173. Epub 2012 Sep 7.

Epidemiology of chronic kidney disease among older adults: a focus on the oldest 
old.

Bowling CB(1), Muntner P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 1665
University Boulevard, Suite 230J, Birmingham, Alabama 35294, USA.

The National Kidney Foundation (NKF), Kidney Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative 
(KDOQI) Clinical Practice Guidelines for Chronic Kidney Disease: Evaluation,
Classification, and Stratification expanded the focus of chronic kidney disease
(CKD) management from end-stage renal disease (ESRD) to the entire spectrum of
kidney disease including early kidney damage through the stages of kidney disease
to kidney failure. A consequence of these guidelines is that a large number of
older adults are being identified as having CKD, many of whom will not progress
to ESRD. Concerns have been raised that reduced estimated glomerular filtration
rate (eGFR) among older adults may not represent "disease" and using age-specific
cut-points for staging CKD has been proposed. This implies that among older
adults, CKD, as currently defined, may be benign. Several recent studies have
shown that among people greater than or equal to 80 years old, CKD is associated 
with an increased risk for concurrent complications of CKD (eg, anemia, acidosis)
and adverse outcomes including mortality and cardiovascular disease (CVD).
Further, among older adults, CKD is associated with problems not traditionally
thought to be associated with kidney disease. These nondisease-specific outcomes 
include functional decline, cognitive impairment, and frailty. Future research
studies are necessary to determine the impact of concurrent complications of CKD 
and nondisease-specific problems on mortality and functional decline, the
longitudinal trajectories of CKD progression, and patient preferences among the
oldest old with CKD.

DOI: 10.1093/gerona/gls173 
PMID: 22960475  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


398. J Geriatr Cardiol. 2012 Jun;9(2):192-6. doi: 10.3724/SP.J.1263.2012.01312.

Acute coronary syndromes: an old age problem.

Simms AD(1), Batin PD, Kurian J, Durham N, Gale CP.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Level 8, Worsley Building,
University of Leeds, Clarendon Way, West Yorkshire, Leeds, LS2 9JT, UK.

The increasing population in older age will lead to greater numbers of them
presenting with acute coronary syndromes (ACS). This has implications on global
healthcare resources and necessitates better management and selection for
evidenced-based therapies. The elderly are a high risk group with more
significant treatment benefits than younger ACS. Nevertheless, age related
inequalities in ACS care are recognised and persist. This discrepancy in care, to
some extent, is explained by the higher frequency of atypical and delayed
presentations in the elderly, and less diagnostic electrocardiograms at
presentation, potentiating a delay in ACS diagnosis. Under estimation of
mortality risk in the elderly due to limited consideration for physiological
frailty, co-morbidity, cognitive/psychological impairment and physical
disability, less input by cardiology specialists and lack of randomised,
controlled trials data to guide management in the elderly may further confound
the inequality of care. While these inequalities exist, there remains a
substantial opportunity to improve age related ACS outcomes. The selection of
elderly patients for specific therapies and medication regimens are unanswered.
There is a growing need for randomised, controlled trial data to be more
representative of the population and enroll those of advanced age with
co-morbidity. A lack of reporting of adverse events, such as renal impairment
post coronary angiography, in the elderly further limit risk benefit decisions.
Substantial improvements in care of elderly ACS patients are required and should 
be advocated. Ultimately, these improvements are likely to lead to better
outcomes post ACS. However, the improvement in outcome is not infinite and will
be limited by non-modifiable factors of age-related risk.

DOI: 10.3724/SP.J.1263.2012.01312 
PMCID: PMC3419819
PMID: 22934104 


399. Mini Rev Med Chem. 2013 Apr;13(4):541-52.

Ghrelin in obesity, physiological and pharmacological considerations.

Álvarez-Castro P(1), Pena L, Cordido F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Lucus Augusti Hospital, Lugo, Spain.

The aim of this review is to summarize the physiological and pharmacological
aspects of ghrelin. Obesity can be defined as an excess of body fat and is
associated with significant disturbances in metabolic and endocrine function.
Obesity has become a worldwide epidemic. In obesity there is a decreased growth
hormone (GH) secretion, and the altered somatotroph secretion in obesity is
functional. Ghrelin is a peptide that has a unique structure with 28 amino-acids 
and an n-octanoyl ester at its third serine residue, which is essential for its
potent stimulatory activity on somatotroph secretion. The pathophysiological
mechanism responsible for GH hyposecretion in obesity is probably multifactorial,
and there is probably a defect in ghrelin secretion. Ghrelin is the only known
circulating orexigenic factor, and has been found to be reduced in obese humans. 
Ghrelin levels in blood decrease during periods of feeding. Due to its orexigenic
and metabolic effects, ghrelin has a potential benefit in antagonizing protein
breakdown and weight loss in catabolic conditions such as cancer cachexia, renal 
and cardiac disease, and age-related frailty. Theoretically ghrelin receptor
antagonists could be employed as anti-obesity drugs, blocking the orexigenic
signal. By blocking the constitutive receptor activity, inverse agonists of the
ghrelin receptor may lower the set-point for hunger, and could be used for the
treatment of obesity. In summary, ghrelin secretion is reduced in obesity, and
could be partly responsible for GH hyposecretion in obesity, ghrelin antagonist
or partial inverse agonists should be considered for the treatment of obesity.


PMID: 22931534  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Kidney Blood Press Res. 2012;35(6):534-48. doi: 10.1159/000340022. Epub 2012 Aug 
8.

'Time and time again': oscillatory and longitudinal time patterns in dialysis
patients.

Kooman JP(1), Usvyat L, van der Sande FM, Thijssen S, Levin N, Leunissen KM,
Kotanko P.

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
jeroen.kooman@mumc.nl

Oscillatory and longitudinal time patterns play a major role in human physiology.
In chronic hemodialysis patients, abnormalities in both time patterns have been
observed, while time patterns can also influence the response of patients to the 
treatment. Abnormal oscillatory patterns have been observed for ultradian rhythms
(cycle time <20 h), such as an impaired heart rate variability and circadian
rhythms, as reflected by reduced day-night blood pressure differences.
Conversely, the circadian rhythm of body temperature may influence the
hemodynamic tolerance to the dialysis treatment. With regard to infradian (cycle 
time >28 h) rhythms, large seasonal differences in mortality, but also in blood
pressure and interdialytic weight gain, have been observed in dialysis patients. 
The most important longitudinal pattern is the general reduction of life span in 
dialysis patients. One explanation of this phenomenon relates to the concept of
accelerated aging in dialysis patients, for which there are various supportive
arguments. From a phenomenological point of view, this concept translates into
the high prevalence of frailty, even in young dialysis patients. A
multidimensional approach appears necessary to adequately address this problem.
In this review, the relevance of disturbed time patterns in dialysis patients is 
discussed. The changes may reflect an impairment or reduction in
homeostatic/homeodynamic control in dialysis patients and also may have important
prognostic and therapeutic implications.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000340022 
PMID: 22890114  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


401. J Bras Nefrol. 2012 Jun;34(2):153-60.

[Prevalence of frailty in patients in chronic kidney disease on conservative
treatment and on dialysis].

[Article in Portuguese]

Mansur HN(1), Damasceno Vde O, Bastos MG.

Author information: 
(1)Universidade Salgado de Oliveira, Rua Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart 131, Cond. São
Lucas I – São Pedro, Juiz de Fora, MG, Brazil. hnmansur@gmail.com

INTRODUCTION: Frailty is a physiological vulnerability status of the patient
which is associated with the increased number of hospitalization and death.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the prevalence of frailty and its associated factors in
patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) on conservative treatment (CT),
hemodialysis (HD) and peritoneal dialysis (PD).
METHODS: Frailty was assessed in 146 patients (86 CT, 37 HD and 23 PD) and
characterized as muscle weakness and exhaustion--by the physical aspect and
vitality domains, respectively, evaluated in the SF-36 quality of life
instrument; physical inactivity--if he or she answered "never" or "hardly ever"
when asked about physical activity; and as unintentional weight loss (> 4.5 kg
per year). Patients were divided into three groups: non-fragile (NF), pre-fragile
(PF) and fragile (F). The demographic, clinical and laboratory data were
extracted from patient charts.
RESULTS: Frailty was diagnosed in 36% of patients on CT, 37.8% in HD and 47.8% in
PD. It was characterized in 36.8% of patients aged between 20 and 40 years and
40.3% of those between 41 and 60 years. Frailty was significantly associated with
the use of vitamin D (r = 0.16; p = 0.03), hemoglobin (r = -0.14; p = - 0.02) and
intact parathyroid hormone (r = 0.16; p = 0.03).
CONCLUSIONS: Frailty is common among patients with CKD on conservative treatment 
and dialysis, even in those who are not elderly. In the patients studied, the
phenotype of frailty was associated with no usage of vitamin D, lower serum
levels of hemoglobin and higher levels of parathyroid hormone.


PMID: 22850917  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Am J Kidney Dis. 2012 Dec;60(6):912-21. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2012.05.017. Epub
2012 Jul 7.

A prospective study of frailty in nephrology-referred patients with CKD.

Roshanravan B(1), Khatri M, Robinson-Cohen C, Levin G, Patel KV, de Boer IH,
Seliger S, Ruzinski J, Himmelfarb J, Kestenbaum B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology, University of Washington
Kidney Research Institute, 325 9th Ave, Seattle, WA 98104, USA.
broshanr@u.washington.edu

BACKGROUND: Frailty is a construct developed to characterize a state of reduced
functional capacity in older adults. However, there are limited data describing
the prevalence or consequences of frailty in middle-aged patients with chronic
kidney disease (CKD).
STUDY DESIGN: Observational study.
SETTING & PARTICIPANTS: 336 non-dialysis-dependent patients with stages 1-4 CKD
with estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) <90 mL/min/1.73 m(2) (by the
CKD-EPI [CKD Epidemiology Collaboration] serum creatinine-based equation) or
evidence of microalbuminuria enrolled in the Seattle Kidney Study, a clinic-based
cohort study. Findings were compared with community-dwelling older adults in the 
Cardiovascular Health Study.
OUTCOME: Prevalence and determinants of frailty in addition to its association
with the combined outcome of all-cause mortality or renal replacement therapy.
MEASUREMENTS: We defined frailty according to established criteria as 3 or more
of the following characteristics: slow gait, weakness, unintentional weight loss,
exhaustion, and low physical activity. We estimated kidney function using serum
cystatin C concentrations (eGFR(cys)) to minimize confounding due to
relationships of serum creatinine levels with muscle mass and frailty.
RESULTS: The mean age of the study population was 59 years and mean eGFR(cys) was
51 mL/min/1.73 m(2). The prevalence of frailty (14.0%) was twice that of the much
older non-CKD reference population (P < 0.01). The most common frailty components
were physical inactivity and exhaustion. After adjustment including diabetes,
eGFR(cys) categories of <30 and 30-44 mL/min/1.73 m(2) were associated with a
2.8- (95% CI, 1.3-6.3) and 2.1 (95% CI, 1.0-4.7)-fold greater prevalence of
frailty compared with GFR(cys) ≥60 mL/min/1.73 m(2). There were 63 events during 
a median 987 days of follow-up. After adjustment, the frailty phenotype was
associated with an estimated 2.5 (95% CI, 1.4-4.4)-fold greater risk of death or 
dialysis therapy.
LIMITATIONS: Cross-sectional study design obscures inference regarding temporal
relationships between CKD and frailty.
CONCLUSIONS: Frailty is relatively common in middle-aged patients with CKD and is
associated with lower eGFR(cys) and increased risk of death or dialysis therapy.

Copyright © 2012 National Kidney Foundation, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2012.05.017 
PMCID: PMC3491110
PMID: 22770927  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Arch Intern Med. 2012 Jul 23;172(14):1071-7. doi:
10.1001/archinternmed.2012.3020.

Frailty, dialysis initiation, and mortality in end-stage renal disease.

Bao Y(1), Dalrymple L, Chertow GM, Kaysen GA, Johansen KL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143, 
USA. yeran.bao@ucsf.edu

BACKGROUND: In light of the recent trend toward earlier dialysis initiation and
its association with mortality among patients with end-stage renal disease, we
hypothesized that frailty is associated with higher estimated glomerular
filtration rate (eGFR) at dialysis start and may confound the relation between
earlier dialysis initiation and mortality.
METHODS: We examined frailty among participants of the Comprehensive Dialysis
Study (CDS), a special study of the US Renal Data System, which enrolled incident
patients from September 1, 2005, through June 1, 2007. Patients were followed for
vital status through September 30, 2009, and for time to first hospitalization
through December 31, 2008. We used multivariate logistic regression to model the 
association of frailty with eGFR at dialysis start and proportional hazards
regression to assess the outcomes of death or hospitalization.
RESULTS: Among 1576 CDS participants included, the prevalence of frailty was 73%.
In multivariate analysis, higher eGFR at dialysis initiation was associated with 
higher odds of frailty (odds ratio [OR], 1.44 [95% CI, 1.23-1.68] per 5
mL/min/1.73 m(2); P < .001). Frailty was independently associated with mortality 
(hazard ratio [HR], 1.57 [95% CI, 1.25-1.97]; P < .001) and time to first
hospitalization (HR, 1.26 [95% CI, 1.09-1.45]; P < .001). While higher eGFR at
dialysis initiation was associated with mortality (HR, 1.12 [95% CI, 1.02-1.23]
per 5 mL/min/1.73 m(2); P = .02), the association was no longer statistically
significant after frailty was accounted for (HR, 1.08 [95% CI, 0.98-1.19] per 5
mL/min/1.73 m(2); P = .11).
CONCLUSIONS: Frailty is extremely common among patients starting dialysis in the 
United States and is associated with higher eGFR at dialysis initiation.
Recognition of signs and symptoms of frailty by clinicians may prompt earlier
initiation of dialysis and may explain, at least in part, the well-described
association between eGFR at dialysis initiation and mortality.

DOI: 10.1001/archinternmed.2012.3020 
PMCID: PMC4117243
PMID: 22733312  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Hemodial Int. 2013 Jan;17(1):41-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1542-4758.2012.00719.x. Epub
2012 Jun 20.

A closer look at frailty in ESRD: getting the measure right.

Painter P(1), Kuskowski M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physical Therapy, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
trish.painter@hsc.utah.edu

Patients treated with dialysis have low levels of physical functioning and
activity. Whether this translates into frailty or not may depend on how the
frailty phenotype is operationalized. This is a secondary analysis of data from
the Renal Exercise Demonstration Project to evaluate two methods of
operationalizing the Fried phenotype for frailty: Using measured walking speed
and muscle weakness (FRAILmeas) and using substitution of the Physical Function
Scale (PF) from the SF-36 questionnaire for walking speed and muscle weakness
(FRAILsubst). Complete data for both measures were available for 188 hemodialysis
patients. The frailty score (FRAILmeas) was the sum of criteria scores for
measured gait speed, chair stand, body mass index, vitality, and physical
activity. The frailty score (FRAILsubst) substituted the PF scale score (<75) as 
a surrogate measure for gait speed and for weakness. The frailty score ranged
from 0 to 5. Scores ≥3 were categorized as frail, and <3 as not frail. The
substitution of the PF score for walking speed and muscle weakness resulted in
78% of patients being categorized as frail compared to 24% using actual measured 
walking speed and muscle weakness (P < .001). The component of frailty that had
the highest prevalence was low physical activity (average 54% of subjects).
Frailty (using the FRAILmeas) was higher in patients with increasing age, female 
gender, and lower self-reported PF. Frailty is highly prevalent in hemodialysis
patients; however, measured constructs of the components of frailty should be
used to report the frailty phenotype.

© 2012 The Authors. Hemodialysis International © 2012 International Society for
Hemodialysis.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1542-4758.2012.00719.x 
PMID: 22716227  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Consult Pharm. 2012 Jun;27(6):431-44. doi: 10.4140/TCP.n.2012.431.

The older adult patient and kidney function.

Nguyen TV(1), Goldfarb DS.

Author information: 
(1)Arnold & Marie Schwartz College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences, Long Island
University, Brooklyn, NY 11201, USA. timothy.nguyen@liu.edu

OBJECTIVE: Many older adults have decreased kidney function. Practitioners should
be informed that no single clinical assessment method is validated in predicting 
their kidney function.
DATA SOURCES: Primary literature identified through MEDLINE/PubMed (1950-2010)
and EMBASE (1980-2010) databases. The search was limited to English language,
human subjects, and individuals 65 years of age and older.
STUDY SELECTION AND DATA EXTRACTION: Research, review articles, and additional
publications related to geriatric, elderly, kidney function assessment, and
cystatin C.
DATA SYNTHESIS: Screening and diagnosing chronic kidney disease are a challenge
in older adults partially because of muscle loss and frailty. The various tools
used to estimate creatinine clearance (Clcr) are not validated and may lead to
under- or overdiagnosis of kidney function. The clinician must be cautious when
using and interpreting results from these values.
RESULTS: Estimating the glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) with either the
Modification of Diet in Renal Disease (MDRD) or Cockcroft-Gault (Clcr) formulae
yielded better predictions of kidney function when compared with creatinine
alone, or to measured Clcr. These estimation methods should be used in clinical
practice to provide a better estimation of kidney function in older adults until 
a more valid assessment tool becomes available.
CONCLUSIONS: There is no proven valid method for eGFR in older adults; however,
the CG and MDRD equations are routinely applied in clinical practice. Kidney
function assessment in older adults remains a challenge, and practitioners should
know their limitations.

DOI: 10.4140/TCP.n.2012.431 
PMID: 22698550  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Curr Pharm Des. 2012;18(31):4800-12.

Clinical application of ghrelin.

Strasser F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Oncological Palliative Medicine, Division Oncology, Dept. Internal Medicine
and Palliative Center, Dept. Interdisciplinary Medical Services, Cantonal
Hospital, St.Gallen, Switzerland. Florian.strasser@kssg.ch

Ghrelin as a human natural hormone is involved in fundamental regulatory
processes of eating and energy balance. Ghrelin signals the nutrient availability
from the gastrointestinal tract to the central nervous system, up-regulates food 
intake and lowers energy expenditure mainly through hypothalamic mediators acting
both centrally and peripherally including the gastrointestinal tract (motility,
epithelium), promotes both neuro-endocrine and inflammatory signals to increase
skeletal muscle growth and decrease protein breakdown, and increases lipolysis
while body fat utilization is reduced. Ghrelin does more to exert its probably
sentinel role around "human energy": it influences through mainly
extra-hypothalamic actions the hedonic and incentive value of food, mood and
anxiety, sleep-wake regulation, learning and memory, and neurogenesis. Recently
numerous ghrelin gene-derived peptides were discovered, demonstrating the
complexity within the ghrelin/ghrelin receptor axis. For clinical applications,
not only the natural ghrelin and its slice variants, but also several modified or
artificial molecules acting at ghrelin-associated receptors were and are
developed. Current clinical applications are limited to clinical studies,
focusing mainly on cachexia in chronic heart failure, COPD, cancer, endstage-
renal-disease or cystic fibrosis, but also on frailty in elderly,
gastrointestinal motility (e.g., gastroparesis, functional dyspepsia,
postoperative ileus), after curative gastrectomy, anorexia nervosa, growth
hormone deficient patients, alcohol craving, sleep-wake regulation (e.g. major
depression), or sympathetic nervous activity in obesity. The results of
completed, preliminary studies support the clinical potential of ghrelin, ghrelin
gene-derived peptides, and artificial analogues, suggesting that larger clinical 
trials are demanded to move ghrelin towards an available and reimbursed
pharmaceutical intervention.


PMID: 22632860  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2012 Apr;41(4):e38-42. doi: 10.1093/ejcts/ezr329.

Subtle changes in renal function are associated with differences in late survival
following adult cardiac surgery.

Howell NJ(1), Freemantle N, Bonser RS, Graham TR, Mascaro J, Rooney SJ, Wilson
IC, Pagano D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiac Surgery, University Hospital Birmingham NHS Foundation
Trust, Birmingham, UK.

OBJECTIVES: To determine the predictors of post-operative renal function
following adult cardiac surgery, and to assess the influence of this on late
survival.
METHODS: Prospectively collected data were analysed on 8032 patients who
underwent coronary artery bypass grafting, valve surgery or combined procedures
from 1 January 1998 until 31 December 2008, who did not require preoperative
renal replacement therapy. The estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) was
calculated by the Modification of Diet in Renal Disease formula accounting for
ethnicity pre-operatively, post-operatively on the fourth post-operative day, and
the post-operative nadir based upon the peak post-operative creatinine within 30 
days of surgery. Late survival data were obtained from the UK Central Cardiac
Audit Database (CCAD). Appropriate frailty analyses were conducted in R and model
fit was compared using Aikaike's Information Criterion. Initial analysis intended
to determine predictors of post-operative renal function including pre-operative 
eGFR, EuroSCORE and surgical procedure including the operative procedure and
bypass time. Further analysis examined its influence on late survival.
RESULTS: Median follow-up was 72 months (IQR 48-105) during which there were 904 
late deaths. The most powerful predictor of the day 4 eGFR was the pre-operative 
eGFR but other factors contributed including increasing EuroSCORE and bypass
time. The pre-operative eGFR was shown to be a strong and independent predictor
of late outcome (P = 0.0001, HR 0.497 95%CI 0.434-564); however, model fit was
significantly improved using the day 4 eGFR (P = 0.0001, HR 0.43 95%CI
0.385-0.482). No specific change in individual renal function was identified as a
predictor of adverse late survival, and neither the pre-operative nor day 4 eGFR 
was predictive of the nadir of renal function.
CONCLUSIONS: Subtle early changes in renal function at the time of surgery are
powerful predictors of adverse late outcome and can be predicted by pre-operative
renal function.

DOI: 10.1093/ejcts/ezr329 
PMID: 22423081  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Contemp Clin Trials. 2012 Jul;33(4):730-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cct.2012.02.019. Epub
2012 Mar 5.

Effects of testosterone supplementation on clinical and rehabilitative outcomes
in older men undergoing on-pump CABG.

Maggio M(1), Nicolini F, Cattabiani C, Beghi C, Gherli T, Schwartz RS, Valenti G,
Ceda GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal and Biomedical Sciences, Section of Geriatrics,
University of Parma, Parma, Italy.

Testosterone levels decrease with age. This decline is steeper during "critical
illnesses". Cardiac surgery is a particular representative model of major
clinical condition producing stress responses similar to those observed during
severe nonsurgical illness. Cardiac revascularization with extracorporeal
circulation is characterized by marked postoperative complications such as
insulin resistance, a pro-inflammatory state, acute anemia and renal dysfunction.
These phenomena are more evident in older subjects, who are particularly
vulnerable in the post-operative state, a condition that has been recently termed
as "acute postoperative frailty". We recently showed that in older men with low
ejection fraction undergoing cardiac revascularization with extracorporeal
circulation, there is a profound decline in anabolic hormones, including
testosterone. After surgery testosterone concentration frequently declines to
less than 200 ng/dl, a situation suggestive of overt hypogonadism. Since men with
low testosterone levels have a high probability of developing mobility
limitations, we considered this a rationale for the perioperative use of
testosterone treatment in older men undergoing cardiac revasularization surgery. 
We hypothesized that testosterone supplementation at this time might attenuate
the impressive post-surgical catabolic hormonal milieu. The aim of this
manuscript is to elucidate an ongoing randomized clinical trial in older men (70+
years old) undergoing elective cardiovascular revascularization with
extracorporeal circulation. This randomized clinical trial will evaluate the
effects of intramuscular testosterone administration on clinical and functional
outcomes in this population. The study will also address potential mechanisms
underlying the expected beneficial effects of testosterone supplementation
including improvement of insulin sensitivity, markers of inflammatory status and 
improved hemoglobin levels.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cct.2012.02.019 
PMID: 22414875  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Cardiovasc Hematol Agents Med Chem. 2012 Jun;10(2):135-47.

Pain management in hematological patients with major organ dysfunctions and
comorbid illnesses.

Niscola P(1), Tendas A, Giovannini M, Scaramucci L, Cupelli L, Ferrannini M,
Brunetti GA, Bondanini F, Palumbo R, Perrotti A, Romani C, Cartoni C, Efficace F,
de Fabritiis P.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Unit, S. Eugenio Hospital, Rome, Italy. pniscola@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Organ dysfunctions and medical complications, such as renal failure, 
liver impairment, coagulation disorders, cardiovascular and respiratory
illnesses, may hamper an adequate pain management in haematological patients.
AIM: To summarize current knowledge on pain management in hematological patients 
presenting major organ dysfunctions and comorbidity. We also attempted to provide
recommendations to optimize analgesia and to minimize side effects in the setting
of medically compromised and frail haematological patients.
METHODS: A systematic search of the literature, using relevant key words, was
conducted in PubMed.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Pain in hematological patients is a common symptom and
is often multi-factorial. Most pharmacotherapeutic measures, including causal
therapies, analgesics and adjuvant agents routinely applied in pain management,
may also be used in the setting of clinical frailty and medical comorbidities;
however, comprehensive clinical and functional patient's evaluations and a
careful consideration of expected benefits and potential adverse events are
required.


PMID: 22352683  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Am J Kidney Dis. 2012 Mar;59(3):428-33. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2011.10.049. Epub
2011 Dec 16.

Risk of herpes zoster in patients treated with long-term hemodialysis: a matched 
cohort study.

Kuo CC(1), Lee CT, Lee IM, Ho SC, Yang CY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Chang-Gung 
Memorial Hospital, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: The risk of herpes zoster in the dialysis population relative to the 
general population is not known. The aim of this study was to perform a
population-based cohort study to investigate the risk of herpes zoster after the 
initiation of hemodialysis therapy in patients with end-stage renal disease
(ESRD) in Taiwan, a country with the highest incidence of ESRD in the world.
STUDY DESIGN: Matched cohort study.
SETTING & PARTICIPANTS: Data were obtained from the Taiwan National Health
Insurance Research Database. 843 patients who were beginning hemodialysis therapy
in 1999-2003 were included as the study cohort and 3,372 patients without ESRD
matched for age and sex were included as a comparison cohort. A multivariate
frailty Cox proportional hazard regression model was used to adjust for
confounding and compare the 6-year herpes zoster-free survival rate between these
2 cohorts.
PREDICTORS: Hemodialysis.
OUTCOMES: Herpes zoster.
RESULTS: Mean years of follow-up were 4.73 and 5.49 for the hemodialysis and
comparison cohorts, respectively. 868 patients developed herpes zoster throughout
the study period, 294 from the hemodialysis cohort and 574 from the comparison
cohort. The incidence rate of herpes zoster (73.34 events/1,000 person-year) was 
significantly higher in the hemodialysis cohort than in the control cohort (31.03
events/1,000 person-years). After adjusting for potential confounders, the
adjusted HR of herpes zoster was 1.98 (95% CI, 1.72-2.27).
LIMITATIONS: We expect that some patients with mild zoster chose not to seek
medical help.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that patients treated with long-term hemodialysis are at
an increased risk of herpes zoster compared with the general population.

Copyright Â© 2012 National Kidney Foundation, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2011.10.049 
PMID: 22178678  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Bull Cancer. 2012 Mar 1;99(3):371-80. doi: 10.1684/bdc.2011.1483.

[Management of chemotherapy in hemodialysis patients].

[Article in French]

Janus N(1), Launay-Vacher V, Deray G, Thyss A, Thariat J.

Author information: 
(1)Hôpital la Pitié-Salpêtrière, service ICAR, Paris, France. janus@psl.aphp.fr

BACKGROUND: The increased incidence of cancer in dialysis patients has been
discussed since the mid-70s. Consequently, oncologists, nephrologists and
pharmacists are increasingly facing challenging situations of cytotoxic drug
handling in dialysis patients. In dialysis patients, two main issues must be
considered. First, renal function of hemodialysis (HD) patients is no longer
functional. Therefore, these patients may necessitate drug dosage reduction,
namely drug prescription, must be cautiously checked before administration with
appropriate dosage adjustment whenever necessary to ensure efficacy while
avoiding overdosage and related side effects. Secondly, drug clearance by
dialysis must be taken into account for appropriate chemotherapy timing in order 
to avoid drug removal, which may result in a loss of efficacy.
METHODS: We reviewed the international literature on the pharmacokinetics,
efficacy, tolerance and dosage adjustment of anticancer drugs used on
hemodialysis cancer patients, using the key words: kidney, renal, dialysis,
hemodialysis, end-stage renal disease and the name of each drug.
RESULTS: Only case reports and small series were found. 57.1% of the drugs need
dosage adjustment and 64.3% should be administered after the dialysis session.
CONCLUSION: Cancer treatment in feasible in dialysis patients. Some drugs require
dosage adaptation while others can be given as in patients with normal kidney
function. These patients need coordinated care between oncologists, nephrologists
and pharmacists to optimize drug delivery and logistics. Frailty scores, like in 
oncogeriatrics, should be built to optimally adapt cancer treatments in these
dialysis patients.

DOI: 10.1684/bdc.2011.1483 
PMID: 22133734  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2012 Feb;7(2):289-96. doi: 10.2215/CJN.08370811. Epub 2011
Nov 23.

Hispanic ethnicity and vascular access use in patients initiating hemodialysis in
the United States.

Arce CM(1), Mitani AA, Goldstein BA, Winkelmayer WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto,
California, USA. cmarce01@stanford.edu

Comment in
    Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2012 Feb;7(2):196-8.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Hispanics are the largest minority in the United
States (comprising 16.3% of the US population) and have 1.5 times the age-, sex-,
and race-adjusted incidence of ESRD compared with non-Hispanics. Poor health care
access and low-quality care generally received by Hispanics are well documented. 
However, little is known regarding dialysis preparation of Hispanic patients with
progressive CKD.
DESIGN, SETTING, PARTICIPANTS, & MEASUREMENTS: Using data from Medical Evidence
Report form CMS-2728-U3, 321,996 adult patients of white or black race were
identified who initiated hemodialysis (HD) between July 1, 2005 and December 31, 
2008. The form captures Hispanic ethnicity, vascular access use at first
outpatient HD, sociodemographic characteristics, and comorbidities. This study
also examined whether use of an arteriovenous fistula (AVF) or graft (AVG) was
reported.
RESULTS: AVF/AVG use was reported in 14.5% of Hispanics and 17.6% in
non-Hispanics (P<0.001). The unadjusted prevalence ratio (PR) was 0.85 (95%
confidence interval [95% CI], 0.83-0.88), indicating that Hispanics were 15% less
likely to use AVG/AVF for their first outpatient HD. Adjustment for age, sex, and
race, as well as a large number of comorbidities and frailty indicators, did not 
change this association (PR, 0.85; 95% CI, 0.83-0.88). Further adjustment for
timing of first predialysis nephrology care, however, attenuated the PR by
two-thirds (PR, 0.94; 95% CI, 0.92-0.97).
CONCLUSIONS: Hispanics are less likely to use arteriovenous access for first
outpatient HD compared with non-Hispanics, which seems to be explained by
variation in the access to predialysis nephrology care.

DOI: 10.2215/CJN.08370811 
PMCID: PMC3280024
PMID: 22114148  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Adv Chronic Kidney Dis. 2011 Nov;18(6):443-9. doi: 10.1053/j.ackd.2011.10.007.

The "no dialysis" option.

Murtagh FE(1), Cohen LM, Germain MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Palliative Care, Policy & Rehabilitation, King's College London,
Cicely Saunders Institute, UK.

Increasing numbers of patients are starting dialysis who have limited prognoses
for 6-month survival. The presence of multiple comorbidities, aging, and frailty 
contributes to this phenomenon. The rate of dialysis withdrawal has been
accelerating over the past decade, and this calls into question the condition of 
patients who are initiating dialysis. One option is to consider and discuss the
"no dialysis" option with patients and family. Patients need to be identified who
may benefit from this option, and their medical management needs to be reviewed.

Copyright © 2011 National Kidney Foundation, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.ackd.2011.10.007 
PMID: 22098664  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


414. BMC Nephrol. 2011 Nov 17;12:63. doi: 10.1186/1471-2369-12-63.

Duration of temporary catheter use for hemodialysis: an observational,
prospective evaluation of renal units in Brazil.

Bonfante GM(1), Gomes IC, Andrade EI, Lima EM, Acurcio FA, Cherchiglia ML.

Author information: 
(1)Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Brazil.
gimacedosilva@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: For chronic hemodialysis, the ideal permanent vascular access is the 
arteriovenous fistula (AVF). Temporary catheters should be reserved for acute
dialysis needs. The AVF is associated with lower infection rates, better clinical
results, and a higher quality of life and survival when compared to temporary
catheters. In Brazil, the proportion of patients with temporary catheters for
more than 3 months from the beginning of therapy is used as an evaluation of the 
quality of renal units. The aim of this study is to evaluate factors associated
with the time between the beginning of hemodialysis with temporary catheters and 
the placement of the first arteriovenous fistula in Brazil.
METHODS: This is an observational, prospective non-concurrent study using
national administrative registries of all patients financed by the public health 
system who began renal replacement therapy (RRT) between 2000 and 2004 in Brazil.
Incident patients were eligible who had hemodialysis for the first time. Patients
were excluded who: had hemodialysis reportedly started after the date of death
(inconsistent database); were younger than 18 years old; had HIV; had no record
of the first dialysis unit; and were dialyzed in units with less than twenty
patients. To evaluate individual and renal unit factors associated with the event
of interest, the frailty model was used (N = 55,589).
RESULTS: Among the 23,824 patients (42.9%) who underwent fistula placement in the
period of the study, 18.2% maintained the temporary catheter for more than three 
months until the fistula creation. The analysis identified five statistically
significant factors associated with longer time until first fistula: higher age
(Hazard-risk - HR 0.99, 95% CI 0.99-1.00); having hypertension and cardiovascular
diseases (HR 0.94, 95% CI 0.9-0.98) as the cause of chronic renal disease;
residing in capitals cities (HR 0.92, 95% CI 0.9-0.95) and certain regions in
Brazil - South (HR 0.83, 95% CI 0.8-0.87), Midwest (HR 0.88, 95% CI 0.83-0.94),
Northeast (HR 0.91, 95% CI 0.88-0.94), or North (HR 0.88, 95% CI 0.83-0.94) and
the type of renal unit (public or private).
CONCLUSION: Monitoring the provision of arteriovenous fistulas in renal units
could improve the care given to patients with end stage renal disease.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2369-12-63 
PMCID: PMC3227575
PMID: 22093280  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


415. J Oncol Pharm Pract. 2012 Jun;18(2):239-44. doi: 10.1177/1078155211426913. Epub
2011 Nov 10.

Reduced time for urinary alkalinization before high-dose methotrexate with
preadmission oral bicarbonate.

Kintzel PE(1), Campbell AD, Yost KJ, Brinker BT, Arradaza NV, Frobish D, Wehr AM,
O'Rourke TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Spectrum Health Hospitals, Grand Rapids, MI, USA.
polly.kintzel@spectrumhealth.org

PURPOSE: Hydration and urinary alkalinization are essential for reducing renal
dysfunction with high dose methotrexate (HDMTX). This report presents an analysis
of institutional methods used to achieve adequate urinary alkalinization and
output for patients receiving single agent HDMTX. Renal and metabolic parameters 
of tolerance were examined.
METHODS: Medical records of adult patients receiving HDMTX during the calendar
years of 2008-2009 were retrospectively reviewed to determine the time to achieve
urine pH > 7. Number of hospital days, bicarbonate dose, ordered hydration rate, 
urine output, and urine pH were assessed. A survival analysis model was run for
time to urine pH > 7 using preadmission oral bicarbonate as a predictor variable 
and including a frailty term. Observational statistics were performed for other
parameters.
RESULTS: The analysis included 79 encounters for ten patients. Urine pH > 7 was
achieved more rapidly in patients receiving preadmission oral bicarbonate
(P = 0.012). The number of patients receiving HDMTX on the same day as admission 
was greater for those receiving preadmission oral bicarbonate (47%) in comparison
to those who did not (2%), and they spent less time in the hospital. A standard
regimen for hydration and urinary alkalinization based on this project is
reported. The nature and frequency of adverse events were as expected for this
treatment.
CONCLUSION: At our institution, the time to achieve urinary alkalinization was
reduced for patients receiving preadmission oral bicarbonate which facilitated
chemotherapy infusion on the same day as admission and decreased the number of
calendar days that patients stayed in the hospital.

DOI: 10.1177/1078155211426913 
PMID: 22075004  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Perit Dial Int. 2011 Mar;31 Suppl 2:S83-5. doi: 10.3747/pdi.2009.00160.

How to address barriers to peritoneal dialysis in the elderly.

Brown EA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Imperial College Kidney and Transplant Institute, Hammersmith Hospital, Du
Cane Road, London, United Kingdom. e.a.brown@imperial.ac.uk

Older patients on dialysis have unique needs and characteristics and their
outcomes vary from that of their younger counterparts. Comparatively fewer will
start or be maintained on peritoneal dialysis (PD) compared to younger patients, 
despite the fact that hemodialysis is often poorly tolerated. Barriers to PD for 
older patients include poor vision, frailty, cognitive dysfunction, accommodation
issues, and a bias from renal teams that older patients cannot do PD. The
development of assisted PD can overcome many of these barriers. The ability of
older patients to use PD as their dialysis modality should not be determined by
whether they live in an area where the nephrologist is a PD enthusiast. All
patients should be given nonbiased information so they can choose the dialysis
modality that gives them the best quality of life and suits their and their
family's lifestyle.

DOI: 10.3747/pdi.2009.00160 
PMID: 21364214  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Maturitas. 2011 Oct;70(2):151-9. doi: 10.1016/j.maturitas.2011.07.006. Epub 2011 
Sep 3.

Management of type 2 diabetes mellitus in the elderly.

Soe K(1), Sacerdote A, Karam J, Bahtiyar G.

Author information: 
(1)SUNY Downstate Medical Center, NY, United States.

AIM: To provide evidence based recommendations for optimal care diabetes care in 
the elderly.
BACKGROUND: Diabetes affects approximately 25% of the population ≥65 years, and
that percentage is increasing rapidly, particularly in minorities who represent
an important fraction of the uninsured/underinsured. Diabetes is an important
cause of hospital admissions and a co-morbidity in as high as 50% of hospital
inpatients. It impacts mortality and quality of life. While tools have become
available to improve glycemic control, enthusiasm for their application must be
tempered with the sober realization of the risks involved in intensification of
glycemic control, chiefly hypoglycemia.
METHODS: Weighted review from PubMed and other literature search tools in
descending order of randomized control trials, observational studies, pilot
studies, published guidelines, the authors' clinical experience, and expert
opinion.
RESULTS/CONCLUSIONS: • HbA1c targets should be stratified according to the
frailty of the elderly diabetic patient: <7.0% in the generally well elderly and 
< 8.0% in the frail elderly. • Therapies are available that achieve glycemic
goals, while minimizing the risk of hypoglycemia, taking into consideration such 
factors as cognitive function, renal and hepatic function, bone density, fall
risk, and hypoglycemia unawareness. • When insulin is used determir or glargine
are safer choices than NPH. • Ultra-short acting prandial insulins are safer than
regular insulin. • Pen devices for insulin delivery significantly reduce dosing
errors and the risk of hypoglycemia. • Sudden managed care formulary changes that
disrupt patients' diabetes treatment should be prevented through national policy 
initiatives. • Up to date home medication lists help prevent dangerous medication
errors. • Widespread adoption of telehealth approaches can significantly improve 
glycemic control and render it safer.

Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.maturitas.2011.07.006 
PMID: 21890292  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Nat Rev Nephrol. 2011 Aug 30;7(10):591-8. doi: 10.1038/nrneph.2011.113.

Epidemiology and management of end-stage renal disease in the elderly.

Brown EA(1), Johansson L.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Department, Imperial College Kidney and Transplant Centre, Hammersmith
Hospital, Du Cane Road, London W12 0HS, UK. e.a.brown@imperial.ac.uk

Elderly patients with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) are at increased risk of
developing aging-related problems, such as frailty, impaired physical function,
falls, poor nutrition and cognitive impairment. These factors affect dialysis
outcomes, which can be very poor in frail, elderly patients who often experience 
a decline in overall health and physical function and have short survival. The
default treatment option for these patients is hospital-based hemodialysis, often
with little consideration of how this modality will affect the survival or
quality of life of individual patients. A comparison of quality of life of
elderly patients on hemodialysis versus peritoneal dialysis shows that those on
peritoneal dialysis have less illness intrusion. Assisted peritoneal dialysis
enables a greater number of frail, elderly patients to have dialysis in their own
homes. Dialysis may not extend survival for those with multiple comorbidities, so
conservative care (nondialysis treatment) should be considered. To improve the
outcomes of elderly patients with ESRD, it is necessary to develop a realistic
approach to overall prognosis, quality of life and how the patient copes with the
disabilities associated with aging. This approach includes having discussions
regarding choice of treatment and end-of-life goals with patients and families.

DOI: 10.1038/nrneph.2011.113 
PMID: 21878885  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Nephron Clin Pract. 2011;119 Suppl 1:c10-3. doi: 10.1159/000328019. Epub 2011 Aug
10.

Dialysis options for end-stage renal disease in older people.

Brown EA(1), Johansson L.

Author information: 
(1)Imperial College Kidney and Transplant Centre, Hammersmith Hospital, London,
UK. e.a.brown @ imperial.ac.uk

The numbers of older patients requiring dialysis therapy is rising, reflecting
the ageing of the general population. Older dialysis patients have a tendency to 
present later for dialysis, have a higher number of comorbid conditions, are at
higher risk of cognitive dysfunction and have increased levels of frailty. These 
are all barriers to home dialysis therapy so hospital haemodialysis (HD) is the
predominant dialysis modality for older patients. Evidence suggests, however,
that home treatment with peritoneal dialysis (PD) intrudes less into the life of 
older patients than hospital HD. Assisted PD is available in some countries and
this enables more older patients to be treated in their own homes. Adjustments to
patient education also need to be made to accommodate the barriers to learning
and decision-making that often exist in older people.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000328019 
PMID: 21832850  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2011 Dec;42(6):824-30. doi: 10.1016/j.ejvs.2011.07.006.
Epub 2011 Jul 31.

Standardised frailty indicator as predictor for postoperative delirium after
vascular surgery: a prospective cohort study.

Pol RA(1), van Leeuwen BL, Visser L, Izaks GJ, van den Dungen JJ, Tielliu IF,
Zeebregts CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University Medical Center Groningen, University of
Groningen, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2011 Dec;42(6):831-2.

OBJECTIVES: To determine whether the Groningen Frailty Indicator (GFI) has a
positive predictive value for postoperative delirium (POD) after vascular
surgery.
METHODS: Between March and August 2010, 142 consecutive vascular surgery patients
were prospectively evaluated. Preoperatively, the GFI was obtained and
postoperatively patients were screened with the Delirium Observation Scale (DOS).
Patients with a DOS-score ≥3 points were assessed by a geriatrician. Delirium was
defined by the DSM-IV-TR criteria. Primary outcome variable was the incidence of 
POD. Secondary outcome variables were any surgical complication and hospital
length of stay (HLOS) (>7 days).
RESULTS: Ten patients (7%) developed POD. The highest incidence of POD was found 
after aortic surgery (17%) and amputation procedures (40%). Increased
comorbidities (p = 0.006), GFI score (p = 0.03), renal insufficiency (p = 0.04), 
elevated C-reactive protein (p = 0.008), high American Society of
Anaesthesiologists score (p = 0.05), a DOS-score of ≥3 points (p = 0.001),
post-operative intensive care unit admittance (p = 0.01) and HLOS ≥7 days (p =
0.005) were risk factors for POD. The GFI score was not associated with a
prolonged HLOS. A mean number of 2 ± 1 (range 0-5) complications were registered.
The receiver operator characteristics (ROC) area under the curve for the GFI was 
0.70.
CONCLUSIONS: The GFI can be helpful in the early identification of POD after
vascular surgery in a select group of high-risk patients.

Copyright © 2011 European Society for Vascular Surgery. Published by Elsevier
Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejvs.2011.07.006 
PMID: 21810543  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


421. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2011 Jun;59(6):980-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2011.03448.x.
Epub 2011 Jun 7.

A roadmap of aging in Russia: the prevalence of frailty in community-dwelling
older adults in the St. Petersburg district--the "Crystal" study.

Gurina NA(1), Frolova EV, Degryse JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Family Medicine, St. Petersburg Medical Academy of Postgraduate 
Studies, St. Petersburg, Russia. degujanna@gmail.com

OBJECTIVES: To categorize the health problems of older Russians and identify the 
number of frail older adults using different approaches.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional study.
SETTING: The Kolpino district of St. Petersburg.
PARTICIPANTS: A random sample of 611 community-dwelling adults aged 65 and older 
was selected from a population-based register and stratified into two age groups 
(65-74, ≥75).
MEASUREMENTS: Anthropometry, medical history, nutritional status, Physical
Performance Battery, activities of daily living, grip strength, spirometry, renal
function, 15-item Geriatric Depression Scale, Mini-Mental State Examination, and 
sense of coherence.
RESULTS: The female:male ratio was 2.5:1; 19% were malnourished or at risk for
malnutrition, and 78.6% presented with one to three chronic pathologies, with no 
differences according to age or sex. Problems with hearing (60.7%), vision
(89.5%), and incontinence (40.9%) were highly prevalent. Moreover, 25.9% of the
younger group (65-74) and 42.5% of the older group (≥75) were found to be at risk
for depression. Mild to severe cognitive impairment was found in 34.5% of the
participants, and 14.4% of those aged 65 to 74 and 33.0% of those aged 75 and
older reported dependence in daily living activities. The prevalence of frailty
assessed using different models varied from 21.1% to 43.9%. The Fried model
revealed the strongest associations with the frailty outcomes (dependence and
performance). No significant differences between the sexes were found in either
age group (P=.82), although the percentage of frail women increased with age
(P=.001).
CONCLUSION: The findings emphasize the need for attention and resources to be
shifted from disease-oriented to functional approaches in the older Russian
population. The population studied is consistent with the Fried model, in which
one in five older adults can be labeled as frail.

© 2011, Copyright the Authors. Journal compilation © 2011, The American
Geriatrics Society.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2011.03448.x 
PMID: 21649632  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2011 Nov;26(11):3646-51. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfr164. Epub
2011 Mar 31.

Late presentation of patients with end-stage renal disease for renal replacement 
therapy--is it always avoidable?

Udayaraj UP(1), Haynes R, Winearls CG.

Author information: 
(1)Richard Bright Renal Unit, Southmead Hospital, Bristol, UK.
udaya.udayaraj@nbt.nhs.uk

BACKGROUND: Twenty-five to 30% of new renal replacement therapy (RRT) patients
present late to renal services. The proportion in whom this is avoidable, and
whether awareness of chronic kidney disease (CKD) has reduced its incidence is
not known.
METHODS: Adult patients starting RRT (2003-2008) in a single unit were grouped
according to the time interval between first presentation to the unit and start
of RRT: <90 days (late presenters); 90-364 days; ≥ 365 days. 'Late presenters'
were classified as follows: acute kidney injury--patients who had acute but
irreversible renal failure; 'avoidable' late referrals, if they had known
pre-existing CKD and 'unavoidable' late referrals, if they had unpredictable
rapid progression of their CKD or had no prior contact with health care.
Mortality risk associated with late presentation was explored using multivariable
Cox regression.
RESULTS: Late presentation was common (24.3%) but late referrals accounted for
only 7.4% and 3.9% were avoidable. The incidence of late referrals decreased from
9.2% in 2003-2005 to 5.5% in 2006-2008 (trend P = 0.07). Late presentation was
associated with increased mortality after adjusting for comorbidity,
transplantation and permanent vascular access, and the majority of late
presenters died due to malignancy or withdrawal of RRT.
CONCLUSIONS: The lower incidence of late referrals and the falling trend could be
due to implementation of automated estimated glomerular filtration rate reporting
and the increased awareness of CKD in primary care. Future prospective studies
are needed to examine the extent to which frailty contributes to this mortality
risk.

DOI: 10.1093/ndt/gfr164 
PMID: 21454353  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2011 Jun 20;340(1):106-10. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2011.02.010.
Epub 2011 Feb 25.

The ghrelin axis in disease: potential therapeutic indications.

Nass R(1), Gaylinn BD, Thorner MO.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, VA, USA.

Ghrelin, the natural ligand for the growth hormone (GH)-secretagogue receptor
(GHS-R), is produced predominantly in the stomach. It is present in the
circulation in two major forms, an acylated and an unacylated form, both of which
have reported activities. Some of the best understood actions of acylated ghrelin
administration are its orexigenic effects, and the stimulation of GH secretion.
Ghrelin also seems to play a role in glucose homeostasis, lipid metabolism and
immune function. Based on its orexigenic and metabolic effects, ghrelin and
ghrelin mimetics have potential benefit in antagonizing protein breakdown and
weight loss in catabolic conditions such as cancer cachexia, renal, cardiac and
pulmonary disease, and age-related frailty. Ghrelin also has potentially useful
positive effects on cardiac function and gastric motility. Ghrelin antagonists
may be of benefit to increase insulin sensitivity and potentiate weight loss. The
following chapter presents some background on ghrelin and ghrelin assays and
discusses some of the potential therapeutic approaches for the use of ghrelin,
ghrelin mimetic compounds and ghrelin antagonists in clinical disease.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mce.2011.02.010 
PMCID: PMC3114265
PMID: 21356273  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2011 Feb;71(2):224-31. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2125.2010.03825.x.

Gentamicin pharmacokinetics in old age and frailty.

Hilmer SN(1), Tran K, Rubie P, Wright J, Gnjidic D, Mitchell SJ, Matthews S,
Carroll PR.

Author information: 
(1)Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.
shilmer@med.usyd.edu.au

AIMS: Frailty, a syndrome of decreased physiological reserve that is prevalent in
old age, impacts on clinical pharmacology. The aims of the study were to (1)
determine whether frailty affects the pharmacokinetics of gentamicin and (2)
assess the accuracy of different estimates of body size and renal clearance as
estimates of gentamicin pharmacokinetics in older inpatients.
METHODS: This was an observational study of gentamicin pharmacokinetics in a
cohort of Australian hospital inpatients aged ≥65 years, who were administered
prophylactic intravenous gentamicin.
RESULTS: Of the 31 participants, 14 were frail and 17 non frail on the Reported
Edmonton Frail Scale. The mean volume of distribution of gentamicin was 14.8 ±
1.4 l in frail participants and 15.3 ± 2.2 l in non frail (NS). Volume of
distribution correlated best with lean bodyweight. Gentamicin clearance was
significantly lower in frail participants (46.6 ± 10.7 ml min(-1)) than in non
frail (58.2 ± 12.4 ml min(-1), P=0.01). The Cockcroft Gault estimate of
creatinine clearance calculated using ideal bodyweight gave the best estimate of 
gentamicin clearance (mean error -0.15 ml min(-1), 95% CI -2.67, 2.39). The
Cockcroft Gault creatinine clearance calculated using actual bodyweight and the
estimated glomerular filtration rate from the modified diet in renal disease
equation overestimated gentamicin clearance, with mean errors of -10.15 ml
min(-1) (95%CI -13.60, -6.71) and -18.86 ml min(-1) (95% CI -22.45, -15.27),
respectively. The Cockcroft Gault creatinine clearance calculated using lean
bodyweight underestimated gentamicin clearance (mean error 6.54 ml min(-1), 95%
CI 4.18, 8.90).
CONCLUSIONS: Frail older people have significantly lower gentamicin clearance
than non frail. The best estimate of gentamicin clearance is obtained from the
Cockcroft Gault creatinine clearance calculated using ideal bodyweight.

© 2011 The Authors. British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology © 2011 The British
Pharmacological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2125.2010.03825.x 
PMCID: PMC3040542
PMID: 21219402  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Curr Aging Sci. 2011 Feb;4(1):33-41.

A review of premature frailty in HIV-infected persons; another manifestation of
HIV-related accelerated aging.

Önen NF(1), Overton ET.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases,, Washington University School of Medicine, 
St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. nonen@dom.wustl.edu

PURPOSE: HIV-related immunological and multisystem accelerated aging contributes 
to the premature occurrence of age-related comorbidities. Such non-AIDS-defining 
comorbidities include cardiovascular disease, dyslipidemia, osteoporosis and
frailty, and are of increasing importance with improved survival on
antiretrovirals. This review will describe the underlying pathogenesis of
HIV-related accelerated aging and will thereafter focus on frailty, a clinical
concept which has only recently been studied in the HIV field.
METHODS: A literature search was performed using PubMed. Cited articles were peer
reviewed and included prospective, retrospective and basic science studies,
systematic reviews and Center for Disease Control and Prevention data.
RESULTS: HIV infection is characterized profound immune dysregulation, which can 
hasten cardiovascular, renal, cerebrovascular and bone disease and precede their 
overt manifestation by years. Viral mediated atherogenesis further accelerates
end organ dysfunction and increases mortality. Frailty, a clinical syndrome
characterized by multisystem dysregulation and increased vulnerability to
stressors, occurs prematurely in HIV-infected persons especially those with
advanced disease. Frailty prevalence and clinical characteristics are similar in 
affected older adults and HIV-infected persons. Its presence is associated with a
number of negative outcomes including greater comorbidity and hospitalization.
CONCLUSION: Premature frailty, like other non-AIDS-defining comorbidities, is a
manifestation of HIV-related accelerated aging. The synergism of HIV infection
and aging has alarming clinical and socioeconomic implications. Research is
needed to identify the factors that predict the development of premature frailty 
among HIV-infected persons and the optimal prevention and management strategies.


PMID: 21204781  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Expert Rev Pharmacoecon Outcomes Res. 2010 Dec;10(6):661-6. doi:
10.1586/erp.10.78.

Can quality of life be improved for the increasing numbers of older patients with
end-stage kidney disease?

Brown EA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Imperial College Kidney and Transplant Institute, Renal Department,
Hammersmith Hospital, Du Cane Road, London W120HS, UK. e.a.brown@imperial.ac.uk

Quality of life is particularly important for older patients with end-stage
kidney disease, particularly when likely survival is short because of the burden 
of comorbidities. The features of old age and frailty make it difficult to cope
with both hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis. Evidence exists that quality of
life is better on peritoneal dialysis compared with hemodialysis, yet the
majority of older patients are placed on hemodialysis. Older patients should
therefore receive appropriate education to enable choice of the appropriate
dialysis modality for their lifestyle. The development of assisted peritoneal
dialysis will enable those who cannot perform their own dialysis to have their
treatment at home. Delaying dialysis to a time when it is actually needed and
discussing the option of conservative care will also improve the quality of the
end-of-life phase for patients with multiple comorbidities and with a poor
overall prognosis.

DOI: 10.1586/erp.10.78 
PMID: 21155699  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Clin Geriatr Med. 2011 Feb;27(1):53-65. doi: 10.1016/j.cger.2010.08.004.

The frail renin-angiotensin system.

Abadir PM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Geriatric Medicine and Gerontology, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, John R. Burton Pavilion, 5505 Hopkins Bayview Circle,
Baltimore, MD 21224, USA. pabadir1@jhmi.edu

Over the last few decades, the understanding of the renin-angiotensin system
(RAS) has advanced dramatically. RAS is now thought to play a crucial role in
physiologic and pathophysiologic mechanisms in almost every organ system and is a
key regulator of hypertension, cardiovascular disease, and renal function.
Angiotensin II (Ang II) promotes inflammation and the generation of reactive
oxygen species and governs onset and progression of vascular senescence, which
are all associated with functional and structural changes, contributing to
age-related diseases. Although the vast majority of the actions of Ang II,
including vascular senescence, are mediated by the Ang II type 1 receptor (AT1R),
the identification, characterization, and cloning of the angiotensin type 2
receptor has focused attention on this receptor and to its antagonistic effect on
the detrimental effects of AT1R. This review provides an overview of the changes 
in RAS with aging and age-disease interactions culminating in the development of 
frailty.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cger.2010.08.004 
PMCID: PMC3764613
PMID: 21093722  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Hemodial Int. 2010 Oct;14 Suppl 1:S32-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1542-4758.2010.00488.x.

Maximum conservative management for patients with chronic kidney disease stage 5.

Burns A(1), Davenport A.

Author information: 
(1)UCL Center for Nephrology, University College London Medical School, London,
UK.

Following the expansion of dialysis services for patients with chronic kidney
disease, an increasing number of elderly patients with varying degrees of frailty
and additional comorbidities have been offered treatment. Life expectancy is
somewhat limited in this group of patients, and initiation of dialysis may not
necessarily improve quality of life. As such, an increasing number of centers are
offering conservative care for patients who have made an informed decision not to
have dialysis. As conservative care includes active treatment of anemia, volume
overload, blood pressure control, and management of uremic symptoms, including
pruritus, we term this approach as maximal conservative management of chronic
kidney disease. We describe our experience of maximum conservative management,
which although may not prolong life, can maintain the quality of life and
functional ability until the final illness in the majority of patients. Although 
these patients do not go to the hospital on a regular basis, coordinated support 
from the hospital, the community, and the care giver/relative is required for
successful care of the patient. Appropriate end of life planning can then be made
according to the wishes of the patient.

© 2010 The Authors. Hemodialysis International © 2010 International Society for
Hemodialysis.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1542-4758.2010.00488.x 
PMID: 21040417  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Ann Cardiol Angeiol (Paris). 2010 Dec;59(6):349-55. doi:
10.1016/j.ancard.2010.10.005. Epub 2010 Oct 15.

[ST-elevation myocardial infarction in octogerians].

[Article in French]

Martin AC(1), Monsegu J.

Author information: 
(1)Hôpital du Val-de-Grâce, Paris, France. ac.angel@hotmail.fr

Coronary artery disease is the leading cause of death in developed countries and 
its incidence and severity is greater among older patients. So, because of the
ageing of the population, clinicians will be increasingly confronted in daily
practice with managing acute coronary syndrome in extreme old age and high-risk
patients. Despite this demographic reality, several large randomized controlled
trials evaluating the benefit-risk ratio of invasive versus conservative approach
have systematically excluded elderly patients. The extrapolation of
evidence-based medicine, initially focused on younger patients, is often
contentious in this population and because of the lack of clear and specific
recommendations in the elderly, the optimal management of STEMI in octogenarians 
remains a topic of debate. Elderly patients present unique issues related to the 
ageing process and multiple comorbid diseases making difficult the extrapolation 
of evidence obtained on younger demographics. Data from registries seem to
support, nevertheless, the benefit of primary revascularization by PCI of the
culprit lesion in "selected" octogenarians with a high technical success rate,
few complications, acceptable short and long-term mortality rate and quality of
life. Obviously, the "ideal octogenarian" doesn't exist and all the old patients 
are not suitable for an invasive approach. Managing elderly patients requires not
only cardiological skills but also geriatric acknowledges and the individualized 
geriatric assessment is the corner store of the decision process. The aim is to
screen for the presence of comorbidities (cognitive disorders, functional
decline, anemia, renal insufficiency…), social isolation and existence of an
underlying frailty. To conclude, the optimal strategy for the management of STEMI
in octogenarians is not univocal: the best approach is the one that offers the
greater benefits regard considerations of general health.

Copyright © 2010. Published by Elsevier SAS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ancard.2010.10.005 
PMID: 20971446  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Kidney Int. 2010 Dec;78(11):1164-70. doi: 10.1038/ki.2010.312. Epub 2010 Sep 1.

Low level of self-reported physical activity in ambulatory patients new to
dialysis.

Johansen KL(1), Chertow GM, Kutner NG, Dalrymple LS, Grimes BA, Kaysen GA.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Service, Nephrology Section, San Francisco VA Medical Center,
Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, California
94121, USA. Kirsten.johansen@ucsf.edu

Physical inactivity contributes to the frailty and the decline in function that
develops over time among patients with end-stage renal disease. We assessed
physical activity among 1547 ambulatory patients new to dialysis in the United
States Renal Data System Comprehensive Dialysis Study. We used a self-reporting
Human Activity Profile that included Maximal and Adjusted Activity Scores and
compared results to established norms by age and gender. Physical activity was
found to be extremely low with scores for all age and gender categories below the
5th percentile of healthy individuals and 95% of patients had scores consonant
with low fitness. Older age, female gender, diabetes, atherosclerotic disease,
and a low level of education were associated with lower activity scores assessed 
by univariate and multivariable linear regression analysis. Higher serum albumin,
creatinine, and lower body mass index, but not hemoglobin levels, were associated
with greater physical activity. By multivariable analysis, patients on
hemodialysis using a catheter reported lower levels of physical activity compared
to those on peritoneal dialysis, hemodialysis using an arteriovenous fistula, or 
with a graft. Lower Maximal and Adjusted Activity Scores were associated with
poor physical function and mental health. Hence, physical activity is
distressingly low among patients new to dialysis. Thus, strategies to enhance
activity in these patients should be explored.

DOI: 10.1038/ki.2010.312 
PMCID: PMC4170106
PMID: 20811334  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Curr Drug Targets. 2011 Jan;12(1):97-106.

Vitamin D deficiency: universal risk factor for multifactorial diseases?

de Borst MH(1), de Boer RA, Stolk RP, Slaets JP, Wolffenbuttel BH, Navis G.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Nephrology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. m.h.de.borst@int.umcg.nl

In the Western world, the majority of morbidity and mortality are caused by
multifactorial diseases. Some risk factors are related to more than one type of
disease. These so-called universal risk factors are highly relevant to the
population, as reduction of universal risk factors may reduce the prevalence of
several types of multifactorial disease simultaneously. Vitamin D deficiency is
traditionally seen as an etiological factor in bone disorders such as rickets and
osteomalacia. Recent studies also suggest a role for vitamin D deficiency in
multifactorial disorders, including progressive renal function loss and
cardiovascular disease; it is also a risk factor for frailty. The potentially
pleiotropic effects of vitamin D analogues support the hypothesis that vitamin D 
deficiency is a universal risk factor. Here we review molecular actions of the
vitamin D receptor (VDR), to identify mechanisms and pathways for vitamin D
deficiency as a universal risk factor. To identify genes directly regulated by
the VDR, we searched for genes containing vitamin D response elements (VDREs). A 
further refinement was made by selecting only VDRE-containing genes with
documented modulation by VDR analogues in vivo. Our search yielded a limited
number of factors possibly related to pleiotropic effects of vitamin D, including
growth factors, hormones, inflammatory factors and factors related to calcium
homeostasis. Results from observational, intervention and mechanistic studies
indicate that vitamin D is a universal risk factor involved in diverse
multifactorial conditions. Further exploration of the multifaceted actions of
vitamin D may pave the way for disease-overriding intervention strategies.


PMID: 20795934  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


432. BMC Geriatr. 2010 Jun 17;10:39. doi: 10.1186/1471-2318-10-39.

The BELFRAIL (BFC80+) study: a population-based prospective cohort study of the
very elderly in Belgium.

Vaes B(1), Pasquet A, Wallemacq P, Rezzoug N, Mekouar H, Olivier PA, Legrand D,
Matheï C, Van Pottelbergh G, Degryse J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Health and Society, Université Catholique de Louvain, Clos
Chapelle-aux-Champs 30, bte 3005, 1200 Brussels, Belgium. Bert.Vaes@uclouvain.be

BACKGROUND: In coming decades the proportion of very elderly people living in the
Western world will dramatically increase. This forthcoming "grey epidemic" will
lead to an explosion of chronic diseases. In order to anticipate booming health
care expenditures and to assure that social security is funded in the future,
research focusing on the relationship between chronic diseases, frailty and
disability is needed. The general aim of the BELFRAIL cohort study (BFC80+) is to
study the dynamic interaction between health, frailty and disability in a
multi-system approach focusing on cardiac dysfunction and chronic heart failure, 
lung function, sarcopenia, renal insufficiency and immunosenescence.
METHODS/DESIGN: The BFC80+ is a prospective, observational, population-based
cohort study of subjects aged 80 years and older in three well-circumscribed
areas of Belgium. In total, 29 general practitioner (GP) centres were asked to
include patients aged 80 and older. Only three exclusion criteria were used:
severe dementia, in palliative care and medical emergency. Two sampling methods
for the recruitment of patients were used. Between November 2, 2008 and September
15, 2009, 567 subjects were included in the BFC80+ study. Every study participant
was invited to undergo four study visits. The GP recorded background variables
and medical history and performed a detailed anamnesis and clinical examination. 
The clinical research assistant performed an extensive examination including
performance testing, questionnaires and technical examinations. Echocardiography 
was performed at home by a cardiologist. A blood sample was collected in the
morning. Follow-up reporting of hard outcome measures including mortality,
hospitalization and morbidity was organized. A second data collection is planned 
after 18 months.
DISCUSSION: The BFC80+ was designed to acquire a better understanding of the
epidemiology and pathophysiology of chronic diseases in the very elderly and to
study the dynamic interaction between health, frailty and disability in a
multi-system approach. The wide variety of dimensions investigated in the BFC80+ 
will enable us not only to investigate in depth the relationship between the
different physiological systems but also to initiate new research questions based
on this unique database of community-dwelling elderly.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2318-10-39 
PMCID: PMC2906485
PMID: 20565795  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


433. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 2010 Jun;11(5):325-32. doi: 10.1016/j.jamda.2009.10.003. Epub
2010 Mar 24.

Utilization of emergency room and hospitalization by Chinese nursing home
residents: a cross-sectional study.

Tang M(1), Woo J, Hui E, Chan F, Lee J, Sham A, Chau PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Shatin, Hong Kong. mariawstang@yahoo.com.hk

Comment in
    J Am Med Dir Assoc. 2010 Jun;11(5):304-5.

OBJECTIVES: This study determined factors associated with increased use of
emergency room (ER) and hospitalization of Chinese nursing home residents.
DESIGN: A cross-sectional study.
SETTING: The setting was 14 nursing homes in Hong Kong.
PARTICIPANTS: Participants were 1820 Chinese nursing home residents.
MEASUREMENTS: Data on facility factors and resident factors were collected.
Resident factors were mainly collected by the Minimum Data Set-Resident
Assessment Instrument 2.0 (MDS-RAI 2.0).
RESULTS: Residing in a for-profit home (OR=6.51), having less than one third of
time spent in activities (OR=1.84), having had recent fall (OR=3.81), having
renal failure (OR=3.17), having had recent initiation of new medications
(OR=1.42), and having had recent physician visit (OR=1.67) were factors
associated with increased use of ER. Male gender (OR=1.49), having a body mass
index (BMI) less than 18.5 kg/m(2) (OR=1.51), being more functionally dependent
(OR=1.18 per 1-point increment in the ADL Hierarchy Scale), having higher burden 
of illness (OR=1.29 per 1-point increment in the CHESS score), having a feeding
tube (OR=3.07), having an indwelling urinary catheter (OR=2.75), having had
recent fall (OR=1.94), having respiratory tract infection (OR=2.05), having
Parkinson's disease (OR=1.55), having anemia (OR=1.70), having had recent
initiation of new medications (OR=2.08), and having had recent physician visit
(OR=1.83) were factors associated with increased risk of hospitalization.
CONCLUSIONS: Although some of the associated factors reflect frailty
characteristics of residents, differences in association between for-profit and
not-for-profit institutions provide evidence of overreliance on the ER, perhaps
as a result of inadequate primary care support.

Copyright 2010 American Medical Directors Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jamda.2009.10.003 
PMID: 20511099  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Minerva Urol Nefrol. 2010 Mar;62(1):87-101.

The elderly patients on hemodialysis.

Anand S(1), Kurella Tamura M, Chertow GM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, CA,
USA. sanand2@stanford.edu

Nephrologists care for an increasing number of elderly patients on hemodialysis. 
As such, an understanding of the overlap among complications of hemodialysis and 
geriatric syndromes is crucial. This article reviews hemodialysis management
issues including vascular access, hypertension, anemia and bone and mineral
disorders with an attention towards the distinct medical needs of the elderly.
Key concepts of geriatrics frailty, dementia and palliative care are also
discussed, as nephrologists frequently participate in decision-making directed
toward balancing longevity, functional status and the burden of therapy.


PMCID: PMC4108205
PMID: 20424572  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Circulation. 2010 May 4;121(17):1926-33. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.885756. 
Epub 2010 Apr 19.

Impact of ABO-incompatible listing on wait-list outcomes among infants listed for
heart transplantation in the United States: a propensity analysis.

Almond CS(1), Gauvreau K, Thiagarajan RR, Piercey GE, Blume ED, Smoot LB,
Fynn-Thompson F, Singh TP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Children's Hospital Boston, and Department of
Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, 300 Longwood Ave, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
christopher.almond@cardio.chboston.org

Comment in
    Circulation. 2010 May 4;121(17):1884-6.

BACKGROUND: The purported advantage of ABO-incompatible (ABO-I) listing is to
reduce wait times and wait-list mortality among infants awaiting heart
transplantation. We sought to describe recent trends in ABO-I listing for US
infants and to determine the impact of ABO-I listing on wait times and wait-list 
mortality.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In this multicenter retrospective cohort study using Organ
Procurement and Transplant Network data, infants<12 months of age listed for
heart transplantation between 1999 and 2008 (n=1331) were analyzed. Infants
listed for an ABO-I transplant were compared with a propensity score-matched
cohort listed for an ABO-compatible transplant through the use of a Cox
shared-frailty model. The primary end point was time to heart transplantation.
The percentage of eligible infants listed for an ABO-I heart increased from 0%
before 2002 to 53% in 2007 (P<0.001 for trend). Compared with infants listed
exclusively for an ABO-compatible heart, infants with a primary ABO-I listing
strategy (n=235) were more likely to be listed 1A, to have congenital heart
disease and renal failure, and to require extracorporeal membrane oxygenation.
For the propensity score-matched groups (n=197 matched pairs), there was no
difference in wait-list mortality; however, infants with blood type O assigned an
ABO-I listing strategy were more likely to undergo heart transplantation by 30
days (31% versus 16%; P=0.007) with a less pronounced effect for infants with
other blood types.
CONCLUSIONS: The proportion of US infants listed for an ABO-I heart
transplantation has risen dramatically in recent years but still appears to be
preferentially used for sicker infant candidates. The ABO-I listing strategy is
associated with a higher likelihood of transplantation within 30 days for infants
with blood group O and may benefit a broader range of transplantation candidates.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.885756 
PMCID: PMC4273502
PMID: 20404257  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


436. J Nephrol. 2010 Sep-Oct;23(5):502-7.

Old age and frailty in the dialysis population.

Brown EA(1), Johansson L.

Author information: 
(1)Imperial College Kidney and Transplant Institute, Hammersmith Hospital,
London, UK. e.a.brown@imperial.ac.uk

Dialysis management is changing over time due to the changing dialysis
population, with many overlapping issues between gerontological and nephrological
care. The conditions that are focused on in this review are frailty, cognitive
impairment, depression and changes in body composition. These factors should be
considered when managing older patients on dialysis.


PMID: 20383872  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Semin Nephrol. 2010 Jan;30(1):59-65. doi: 10.1016/j.semnephrol.2009.10.013.

Rehabilitation in the renal population: barriers to access.

Kutner NG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine and the US Renal Data System
Rehabilitation/Quality of Life Special Studies Center, Emory University, Atlanta,
GA 30322, USA. nkutner@emory.edu

Administrative data suggest familiar socioeconomic, race, sex, and age
disparities in renal patients' receipt of services such as cardiac
rehabilitation. Dialysis facility characteristics and disparities in access to
transplantation, home-based dialysis, and more frequent dialysis also may
influence patients' access to rehabilitation opportunities. Tested models exist
for interdisciplinary inpatient rehabilitation, exercise/physical conditioning
programs, and psychosocial interventions, and several of these programs consider 
the special needs of particular age groups. Recognition of the importance of
physical activity/exercise and depressed mood as predictors of patient outcomes, 
and research addressing the concept of frailty, effectively may increase the
salience of rehabilitation objectives throughout the renal community.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semnephrol.2009.10.013 
PMID: 20116649  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2009 Dec;4 Suppl 1:S56-63. doi: 10.2215/CJN.03090509.

Biochemistry and biomarkers of inflamed patients: why look, what to assess.

Kaysen GA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, University of California,
Davis, CA 95616, USA. gakaysen@ucdavis.edu

Specific laboratory tests and physical findings are available to the practicing
clinician that should raise the suspicion of inflammation. Inflammation is
related to specific clinical outcomes. Once identified, changes in clinical
practice may affect the level of inflammation in individual and or groups of
dialysis patients with the hope that these changes may in turn affect outcome in 
a positive manner. Standard clinical tests and observations associated with
inflammation are hypoalbuminemia, erythropoietin resistance, decreased iron
saturation accompanied by high ferritin, frailty, low serum creatinine, reduced
total and LDL-cholesterol, and increased C reactive protein (CRP). Inflammation
is strongly associated with loss of physical function, dyslipidemia (low LDL- and
HDL-cholesterol, increased triglycerides), and anemia that is unresponsive to
erythropoietin. Inflammation is associated with cardiovascular events, increased 
hospitalization, and death. Correctible causes of inflammation are tunneled
dialysis catheters, arteriovenous grafts, catheter infection, periodontal
disease, poor water quality, and dialyzer incompatibility. Obesity also is a
source of cytokines but may be less amenable to treatment. Inflammation is
multifactorial in dialysis patients. Some sources are recognizable and
correctable, such as vascular access type, clinical infection, and water quality,
and some are not. Inflammation is strongly associated with outcome.

DOI: 10.2215/CJN.03090509 
PMID: 19996007  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens. 2010 Mar;19(2):153-9. doi:
10.1097/MNH.0b013e328335f939.

Health-related quality of life outcomes in chronic kidney disease.

Soni RK(1), Weisbord SD, Unruh ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania 15213, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) endure compromised 
health-related quality of life (HRQOL). Although the link between HRQOL and
increased mortality in patients with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) is well
documented, less is known about the relationship between CKD and HRQOL. This
article reviews the recent evidence on HRQOL, its correlates and proposed
intervention strategies to improve HRQOL in CKD.
RECENT FINDINGS: A growing body of literature indicates that various comorbid
conditions related to CKD play a substantial role in impaired HRQOL in CKD.
Hypertension, both a cause and complication of CKD, negatively affects HRQOL due 
to associated comorbidities, side effects from antihypertensive medications and
awareness of the diagnosis. Anemia has been associated with HRQOL, but concerns
about the safety of erythropoietin-stimulating agents (ESAs) have led to more
conservative anemia treatment. Frailty, symptom burden and depression are also
major contributory factors to HRQOL in CKD.
SUMMARY: Certain determinants of HRQOL in CKD, namely anemia and depression, are 
treatable. Early identification and correction may improve overall well being of 
patients. Clinical trials are required to demonstrate whether treatment
interventions benefit HRQOL in this high-risk population. Furthermore, whether
integration of HRQOL assessment into routine clinical practice will improve HRQOL
outcomes remains to be determined.

DOI: 10.1097/MNH.0b013e328335f939 
PMCID: PMC2900393
PMID: 20051850  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


440. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2009 Sep;57(9):1666-71. doi: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2009.02392.x. 
Epub 2009 Jul 21.

High oxidative stress is correlated with frailty in elderly chinese.

Wu IC(1), Shiesh SC, Kuo PH, Lin XZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung
University, Tainan 70403, Taiwan.

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the relationship between oxidative stress and frailty in 
elderly people.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional study.
SETTING: Community and hospital-based outpatient clinic.
PARTICIPANTS: Ninety participants aged 65 and older.
MEASUREMENTS: Frailty status was determined according to the presence of weak
handgrip strength, weight loss, slow walking speed, exhaustion, and low activity 
level and was classified as frail (> or =3 criteria), prefrail (1 or 2 criteria),
or robust (0 criteria). An oxidative stress marker (serum
8-hydroxy-2'-deoxyguanosine, 8-OHdG), metabolic markers (body mass index,
waist-hip ratio, serum lipids, glucose, and albumin), an inflammatory marker
(serum high-sensitivity C-reactive protein, hs-CRP), demographic information, and
comorbidities (diabetes mellitus, hypertension, congestive heart failure,
osteoarthritis, overweight or obesity, impaired fasting plasma glucose, renal
insufficiency, and depression) were assessed.
RESULTS: Of the 90 participants, 21 (23.3%) were frail, 56 (62.2%) were prefrail,
and 13 (14.4%) were robust. Frail subjects had higher median (range) serum 8-OHdG
(2.5 ng/mL (1.5-6.2 ng/mL) vs 2.3 ng/mL (0.5-8.1 ng/mL) and 1.0 ng/mL (0.5-5.3
ng/mL)) and serum hs-CRP (2.5 mg/L (0.3-32.1 mg/L) vs 1.8 mg/L (0.3-50.5 mg/L)
and 1.7 mg/L (0.3-4.0 mg/L)) levels, lower mean+/-standard deviation serum
albumin levels (4.1+/-0.4 g/dL vs 4.4+/-0.4 g/dL and 4.6+/-0.2 g/dL) and higher
mean waist-hip ratios (0.96+/-0.11 vs 0.91+/-0.07 and 0.89+/-0.05)) than prefrail
and robust subjects, respectively (P<.05 for all). In multivariable regression
analysis, high serum 8-OHdG level was still significantly associated with frailty
after adjusting for age, smoking status, comorbidities, waist-hip ratio, serum
albumin level, and hs-CRP level.
CONCLUSION: High oxidative stress, characterized by high serum 8-OHdG level, was 
independently associated with frailty in the selected sample of elderly Chinese.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2009.02392.x 
PMID: 19682113  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Am J Med. 2009 Jul;122(7):664-71.e2. doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2009.01.026.

Frailty and chronic kidney disease: the Third National Health and Nutrition
Evaluation Survey.

Wilhelm-Leen ER(1), Hall YN, K Tamura M, Chertow GM.

Author information: 
(1)Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA.
ewilhelm@stanford.edu

BACKGROUND: Frailty is common in the elderly and in persons with chronic
diseases. Few studies have examined the association of frailty with chronic
kidney disease.
METHODS: We used data from the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey to estimate the prevalence of frailty among persons with chronic kidney
disease. We created a definition of frailty based on established validated
criteria, modified to accommodate available data. We used logistic regression to 
determine whether and to what degree stages of chronic kidney disease were
associated with frailty. We also examined factors that might mediate the
association between frailty and chronic kidney disease.
RESULTS: The overall prevalence of frailty was 2.8%. However, among persons with 
moderate to severe chronic kidney disease (estimated glomerular filtration rate <
45 mL/min/1.73 m2), 20.9% were frail. The odds of frailty were significantly
increased among all stages of chronic kidney disease, even after adjustment for
the residual effects of age, sex, race, and prevalent chronic diseases. The odds 
of frailty associated with chronic kidney disease were only marginally attenuated
with additional adjustment for sarcopenia, anemia, acidosis, inflammation,
vitamin D deficiency, hypertension, and cardiovascular disease. Frailty and
chronic kidney disease were independently associated with mortality.
CONCLUSION: Frailty is significantly associated with all stages of chronic kidney
disease and particularly with moderate to severe chronic kidney disease.
Potential mechanisms underlying the chronic kidney disease and frailty connection
remain elusive.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2009.01.026 
PMCID: PMC4117255
PMID: 19559169  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Contrib Nephrol. 2009;163:264-9. doi: 10.1159/000223809. Epub 2009 Jun 3.

Peritoneal dialysis in the elderly.

Brown EA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Imperial College Kidney and Transplant Institute, Hammersmith Hospital,
London, UK. e.a.brown@imperial.ac.uk

The elderly on dialysis have unique needs and characteristics and their outcomes 
vary from those of their younger counterparts. Comparatively fewer will start or 
be maintained on peritoneal dialysis (PD) compared to younger patients despite
the fact that haemodialysis is often poorly tolerated. A home-based treatment
also avoids the need for transport which can be expensive and adversely affect
the quality of life of a patient. Barriers to PD for older patients include poor 
vision, frailty, cognitive dysfunction, accommodation issues and a prejudice from
renal teams that older patients cannot do PD. In France, where assistance from
community nurses has been available for many years, PD is predominantly a
treatment for the elderly and older, sicker patients are often preferentially
placed on PD. The use of assisted PD is growing in other countries and where this
happens, there is a growth in the prevalent PD population. The ability of older
patients to use PD as their dialysis modality should not be determined by whether
they live in an area where the nephrologist is a PD enthusiast or not. Patients
have the right to receive appropriate non-biased information so they can choose
the dialysis modality which gives them the best quality of life and suits their
and their family's lifestyle.

DOI: 10.1159/000223809 
PMID: 19494624  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Contrib Nephrol. 2009;163:237-42. doi: 10.1159/000223804. Epub 2009 Jun 3.

How to persuade peritoneal dialysis - skeptical hemodialysis fans.

Rodrigues A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Hospital de Santo António, Porto, Portugal.
ar.cbs@mail.telepac.pt

Already from its early decades, peritoneal dialysis (PD) has proved to be
efficient and able to confer similar or better chronic patient survival in
comparison with hemodialysis (HD). More recent years allowed many PD therapy
advances with further outcomes improvement: mortality, hospitalizations and
clinical complications all have been reduced across patient's vintages. Adequacy 
parameters of PD also compare advantageously with the erroneously named
'high-efficiency' HD which is now facing the limitations of intermittent
procedures, frailty of KT/V as measure of adequacy, importance of sustained fluid
removal and time of dialysis. Adequacy should also include life satisfaction and 
PD also compares favorably as a home therapy. The best approach, also the most
intelligent and cost-effective, would be not to underestimate a different
therapy, but discover how complementary it can be for success of long term
patient treatment.

DOI: 10.1159/000223804 
PMID: 19494619  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Ann Cardiol Angeiol (Paris). 2009 Apr;58(2):67-73. doi:
10.1016/j.ancard.2009.01.001. Epub 2009 Feb 21.

[Multifactorial and typological analysis of frailty in uncontrolled
hypertensives. The Eclat survey].

[Article in French]

Ducluzeau PH(1), Benetos A, Pannier B, Covillard J, Naudascher M,
Geneix-Benabdallah F, Clerson P, Prost PL.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrino-diabétologie-nutrition, CHU Hôtel-Dieu, 4, rue Larrey, 49030 Angers 
cedex, France. ph.ducluzeau@laposte.net

OBJECTIVE: The aim of the Eclat survey was to evaluate the frequency of frailty
in uncontrolled hypertensives and to individualize different frailty profiles.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This was an observational, prospective, longitudinal survey
conducted in the cohort of uncontrolled hypertensive patients aged 55 years or
more. Morbid events having occurred between two visits at a 6-month interval were
reported. Patients with at least one event were considered to be frail.
Predictive factors of at least one event were identified (logistic regression).
The analysis was completed by a typological analysis (principal components
analysis and clustering).
RESULTS: At least one event occurred in 211 (9%) of 2306 patients (males 55%,
67+/-9 years old, blood pressure [BP]=160+/-11/93+/-8 mmHg, diabetes 23%):
cardiovascular (1.7%), gerontological (5.5%), onset of diabetes (1.3%), worsening
of renal impact (2%). Three frailty profiles were identified: patients at low
risk (n=1507, event rate=6%), with neither cardiovascular risk factors nor target
organ damage; patients at moderate risk (n=335, event rate=12%) with numerous
risk factors but no target organ damage and patients at high risk (n=243, event
rate=23%), the older ones, in bad general condition, with target organ damage,
sensorial deficits and cognitive disorders. In a population of uncontrolled
hypertensives aged 55 years or more, 9% could be considered as frailty.
CONCLUSION: Therapeutic measures might be adapted according to the frailty
profile of the patient. With respect to treatment management, healthcare
behaviour could differ depending on these frailty profiles.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ancard.2009.01.001 
PMID: 19303064  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


445. BMC Blood Disord. 2009 Feb 27;9:2. doi: 10.1186/1471-2326-9-2.

Factors associated with hospital readmission in sickle cell disease.

Loureiro MM(1), Rozenfeld S, Sá Carvalho M, Portugal RD.

Author information: 
(1)Rio de Janeiro Federal University (UFRJ), Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.
mloureiro@hucff.ufrj.br

BACKGROUND: Sickle cell disease is the most frequent hereditary disease in
Brazil, and people with the disease may be hospitalised several times in the
course of their lives. The purpose of this study was to estimate the hazard
ratios of factors associated with the time between hospital admissions.
METHODS: The study sample comprised all patients admitted, from 2000 to 2004, to 
a university hospital in Rio de Janeiro State, south-east Brazil, as a result of 
acute complications from sickle cell disease (SCD). Considering the statistical
problem of studying individuals with multiple events over time, the following
extensions of Cox's proportional hazard ratio model were compared: the
independent increment marginal model (Andersen-Gill) and the random effects
model.
RESULTS: The study considered 71 patients, who were admitted 223 times for acute 
events related to SCD. The hazard ratios for hospital readmission were
statistically significant for the prior occurrence of vaso-occlusive crisis and
development of renal failure. However, analysis of residuals of the marginal
model revealed evidence of non-proportionality for some covariates.
CONCLUSION: the results from applying the two models were generally similar,
indicating that the findings are not highly sensitive to different approaches.
The better fit by the frailty model suggests that there are unmeasured individual
factors with impact on hospital readmission.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2326-9-2 
PMCID: PMC2655285
PMID: 19250540 


446. Biometrics. 2009 Sep;65(3):737-45. doi: 10.1111/j.1541-0420.2008.01168.x. Epub
2009 Jan 23.

A semiparametric joint model for longitudinal and survival data with application 
to hemodialysis study.

Li L(1), Hu B, Greene T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Quantitative Health Sciences, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio 
44195, USA. lil2@ccf.org

In many longitudinal clinical studies, the level and progression rate of
repeatedly measured biomarkers on each subject quantify the severity of the
disease and that subject's susceptibility to progression of the disease. It is of
scientific and clinical interest to relate such quantities to a later
time-to-event clinical endpoint such as patient survival. This is usually done
with a shared parameter model. In such models, the longitudinal biomarker data
and the survival outcome of each subject are assumed to be conditionally
independent given subject-level severity or susceptibility (also called frailty
in statistical terms). In this article, we study the case where the conditional
distribution of longitudinal data is modeled by a linear mixed-effect model, and 
the conditional distribution of the survival data is given by a Cox proportional 
hazard model. We allow unknown regression coefficients and time-dependent
covariates in both models. The proposed estimators are maximizers of an exact
correction to the joint log likelihood with the frailties eliminated as nuisance 
parameters, an idea that originated from correction of covariate measurement
error in measurement error models. The corrected joint log likelihood is shown to
be asymptotically concave and leads to consistent and asymptotically normal
estimators. Unlike most published methods for joint modeling, the proposed
estimation procedure does not rely on distributional assumptions of the
frailties. The proposed method was studied in simulations and applied to a data
set from the Hemodialysis Study.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1541-0420.2008.01168.x 
PMID: 19173700  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Nucl Recept Signal. 2008;6:e010. doi: 10.1621/nrs.06010. Epub 2008 Nov 26.

Selective androgen receptor modulators in preclinical and clinical development.

Narayanan R(1), Mohler ML, Bohl CE, Miller DD, Dalton JT.

Author information: 
(1)Preclinical Research and Development, GTx, Inc., Memphis, Tennessee, USA.

Androgen receptor (AR) plays a critical role in the function of several organs
including primary and accessory sexual organs, skeletal muscle, and bone, making 
it a desirable therapeutic target. Selective androgen receptor modulators (SARMs)
bind to the AR and demonstrate osteo- and myo-anabolic activity; however, unlike 
testosterone and other anabolic steroids, these nonsteroidal agents produce less 
of a growth effect on prostate and other secondary sexual organs. SARMs provide
therapeutic opportunities in a variety of diseases, including muscle wasting
associated with burns, cancer, or end-stage renal disease, osteoporosis, frailty,
and hypogonadism. This review summarizes the current standing of research and
development of SARMs, crystallography of AR with SARMs, plausible mechanisms for 
their action and the potential therapeutic indications for this emerging class of
drugs.

DOI: 10.1621/nrs.06010 
PMCID: PMC2602589
PMID: 19079612  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Rev Med Interne. 2008 Sep;29 Suppl 2:S231-7. doi: 10.1016/S0248-8663(08)73950-X.

[Physiopathology of the diabetic foot].

[Article in French]

Malgrange D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Service de Médecine Interne, CHU Reims, Reims, France. dmalgrange@chu-reims.fr

Diabetic foot ulcerations result from different physiopathological mechanisms; a 
clear understanding of them is crucial to reduce their incidence, provide early
care, and finally delay the amputation risk. The three main diabetes
complications involved in foot ulcerations are neuropathy, peripheral arterial
disease, and infection. The most common pathway to ulceration is peripheral
sensorimotor and autonomic neuropathy, leading to loss of sensitivity, foot
deformities, high foot pressure, and dry skin. Peripheral arterial disease is
more frequent and more serious in the diabetic population. It delays
cicatrization and causes gangrene and finally amputation. Infection is also a
major complication of ulceration because of its risk of spreading into deep
tissue and bone, which increases the risk of amputation. Infection may also
generalize and become life-threatening. These complications preferentially affect
the foot because it is exposed to hyper pressure, neuropathy, and peripheral
arterial disease, which cause distal lesions, and the foot is exposed to a closed
atmosphere, a source of soaking and skin frailty. Diabetes itself may enhance the
risk of complications stemming from the disease's long-term progression and poor 
glucose control, thereby affecting ocular and renal functions. Finally, some
psychosocial situations such as depression syndrome or poor hygiene possibly
enhance diabetic foot occurrence.

DOI: 10.1016/S0248-8663(08)73950-X 
PMID: 18822248  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Ann Intern Med. 2008 Aug 19;149(4):242-50.

Serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D concentrations and risk for hip fractures.

Cauley JA(1), Lacroix AZ, Wu L, Horwitz M, Danielson ME, Bauer DC, Lee JS,
Jackson RD, Robbins JA, Wu C, Stanczyk FZ, LeBoff MS, Wactawski-Wende J, Sarto G,
Ockene J, Cummings SR.

Author information: 
(1)University of Pittsburgh, Department of Epidemiology, 130 DeSoto Street,
Crabtree A524, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA. jcauley@edc.pitt.edu

Summary for patients in
    Ann Intern Med. 2008 Aug 19;149(4):I42.

BACKGROUND: The relationship between serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D [25(OH) vitamin D]
concentration and hip fractures is unclear.
OBJECTIVE: To see whether low serum 25(OH) vitamin D concentrations are
associated with hip fractures in community-dwelling women.
DESIGN: Nested case-control study.
SETTING: 40 clinical centers in the United States.
PARTICIPANTS: 400 case-patients with incident hip fracture and 400 control
participants matched on the basis of age, race or ethnicity, and date of blood
draw. Both groups were selected from 39 795 postmenopausal women who were not
using estrogens or other bone-active therapies and who had not had a previous hip
fracture.
MEASUREMENTS: Serum 25(OH) vitamin D was measured and patients were followed for 
a median of 7.1 years (range, 0.7 to 9.3 years) to assess fractures.
RESULTS: Mean serum 25(OH) vitamin D concentrations were lower in case-patients
than in control participants (55.95 nmol/L [SD, 20.28] vs. 59.60 nmol/L [SD,
18.05]; P = 0.007), and lower serum 25(OH) vitamin D concentrations increased hip
fracture risk (adjusted odds ratio for each 25-nmol/L decrease, 1.33 [95% CI,
1.06 to 1.68]). Women with the lowest 25(OH) vitamin D concentrations (< or =47.5
nmol/L) had a higher fracture risk than did those with the highest concentrations
(> or =70.7 nmol/L) (adjusted odds ratio, 1.71 [CI, 1.05 to 2.79]), and the risk 
increased statistically significantly across quartiles of serum 25(OH) vitamin D 
concentration (P for trend = 0.016). This association was independent of number
of falls, physical function, frailty, renal function, and sex-steroid hormone
levels and seemed to be partially mediated by bone resorption.
LIMITATIONS: Few case-patients were nonwhite women. Bone mineral density and
parathyroid hormone levels were not accounted for in the analysis.
CONCLUSION: Low serum 25(OH) vitamin D concentrations are associated with a
higher risk for hip fracture.


PMCID: PMC2743412
PMID: 18711154  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Am J Kidney Dis. 2008 Nov;52(5):956-61. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2008.04.010. Epub
2008 Jun 17.

A prospective pilot study to measure changes in functional status associated with
hospitalization in elderly dialysis-dependent patients.

Lo D(1), Chiu E, Jassal SV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiatry and Kinesiology, University of Western Ontario,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Older dialysis patients have a high burden of mortality and
morbidity. Frailty and functional disability are common. One of the main
determinants of functional disability in nondialysis populations is acute
hospitalization. Such episodes are predictive of increased mortality and a future
need for long-term care. Based on the high prevalence of disability in the
dialysis population, we undertook a pilot study to determine functional
impairment at the time of admission and again at 1 week after discharge.
STUDY DESIGN: Prospective cohort study.
SETTING & PARTICIPANTS: Prevalent dialysis patients older than 65 years admitted 
to a single acute-care institution during a 3-month period.
OUTCOMES: The proportion of dialysis patients with difficulty with activities of 
daily living at baseline and 1 week after discharge.
MEASUREMENT: Basic activities of daily living; Lawton Brody Instrumental
Activities of Daily Living score; timed up-and-go and handgrip tests; Trails A & 
B, and the clock test.
RESULTS: At the time of admission, only 8 of 35 individuals reported being
independent with basic activities of daily living. None of the patients was
independent with instrumental activities of daily living. At 1 week after
discharge, patients showed deterioration in all aspects of function except the
ability to use the telephone and manage their financial affairs. A total of 73.3%
of patients (95% confidence interval, 54.1 to 87.7) experienced a decline in
personal functional independence in association with hospitalization.
LIMITATIONS: This is a pilot study with a small number of patients who were
studied at only 2 times (admission and 1 week after discharge).
CONCLUSIONS: Results of this study suggest that hospitalization is associated
with a high rate of disability in elderly dialysis patients. Further study is
required to determine whether the functional deterioration seen with
hospitalization improves over time.

DOI: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2008.04.010 
PMID: 18562063  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


451. J Nutr Health Aging. 2008 May;12(5):303-8.

Markers of B-vitamin deficiency and frailty in older women.

Matteini AM(1), Walston JD, Fallin MD, Bandeen-Roche K, Kao WH, Semba RD, Allen
RH, Guralnik J, Fried LP, Stabler SP.

Author information: 
(1)Johns Hopkins Institutions, Baltimore, MD, USA. amatteini@jhmi.edu

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the association between markers of vitamins B12, B6 and
folate deficiency and the geriatric syndrome of frailty.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional study of baseline measures from the combined Women's
Health and Aging Studies.
SETTING: Baltimore, Maryland.
PARTICIPANTS: Seven hundred three community-dwelling women, aged 70-79.
MEASUREMENTS: Frailty was defined by five-component screening criteria that
include weight, grip strength, endurance, physical activity and walking speed
measurements and modeled as binary and 3-level polytomous outcomes. Independent
variables serum vitamin B6, vitamin B12, methylmalonic acid, total homocysteine, 
cystathionine and folate were modeled continuously and as abnormal versus normal.
RESULTS: Serum biomarker levels varied significantly by race. All analyses were
race-stratified and results are reported only for Caucasian women due to small
African American sample size. In polytomous logistic regression models of 3-level
frailty, Caucasian women with increasing MMA, defined either continuously or
using a predefined threshold, had 40-60% greater odds of being prefrail (p-values
< 0.07) and 1.66-2.33 times greater odds of being frail (p-values < 0.02)
compared to nonfrails after adjustment for age, education, low serum carotenoids,
alcohol intake, cardiovascular disease and renal impairment. Both binary and
polytomous frailty models evaluating vitamin B12 as the main exposure estimated
odds ratios that were similar in trend yet slightly less significant than the MMA
results.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that vitamin B12 deficiency may contribute to 
the frailty syndrome in community-dwelling older women. Future studies are needed
to explore these relationships longitudinally.


PMCID: PMC2739594
PMID: 18443711  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Am J Geriatr Cardiol. 2008 Jan-Feb;17(1):7-12.

The utility of the 6-minute walk test as a measure of frailty in older adults
with heart failure.

Boxer RS(1), Wang Z, Walsh SJ, Hager D, Kenny AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Family Medicine and Internal Medicine, Divisions of Cardiology
and Geriatrics, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA.
rebecca.boxer@uhhospitals.org

Patients with heart failure (HF) are at increased risk for frailty, and
identification is challenging. The authors assessed the distance on the 6-minute 
walk test (6MWT) as a measure of frailty in 60 older HF patients (ejection
fraction <or= 40%) compared with frailty phenotype (FP). Scores were dichotomized
to frail (F) or nonfrail (NF), and the results of 6MWT were dichotomized to low
endurance (LE) or normal endurance (NE). FP and 6MWT results were in moderate
agreement (kappa=0.57, confidence interval [CI], 0.36-0.79; age-adjusted
kappa=0.54, 95% CI, 0.33-0.76);25% of participants were classified as F/LE, and
55% were classified as NF/NE. Discordance was asymmetric (McNemar P=.006); 18% of
participants were NF/LE. There were no differences between the NF/LE and other
groups in age, sex, body mass index, or physical activity level. Results in the
NF/LE group differed from those in the NF/NE group by a slower 8-foot walking
speed (P=.02), weaker grip strength (P=.056), and worse renal function (P=.01)
and from those in the F/LE group by faster 8-foot walking speed (P<.001). The
6MWT may be useful to identify frailty and those in transition to frailty.


PMID: 18174754  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


453. J Palliat Med. 2007 Oct;10(5):1137-45.

Diagnostic classifications and resource utilization of decedents served by the
Department of Veterans Affairs.

Duffy SA(1), Copeland LA, Hopp FP, Zalenski RJ.

Author information: 
(1)VA Center for Clinical Management Research, Health Services Research and
Development, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48113-0170, USA. Sonia.Duffy@va.gov

BACKGROUND: Given the volume and cost of inpatient care during the last year of
life, there is a critical need to identify patterns of dying as a means of
planning end-of-life care services, especially for the growing number of older
persons who receive services from the Veterans Health Administration (VHA).
METHODS: A retrospective computerized record review was conducted of 20,933 VHA
patients who died as inpatients between October 1, 2001 and September 30, 2002.
Diagnoses were aggregated into one of five classification patterns of death and
analyzed in terms of health care resource utilization (mean number of inpatient
days and cumulative outpatient visits in the year preceding the patient's death).
RESULTS: Cancer deaths were the most common (30.4%) followed by end-stage renal
disease (ESRD) (23.2%), cardiopulmonary failure (21.4%), frailty (11.6%), "other"
diagnoses (7.3%), and sudden deaths (6.1%). Those with ESRD were more likely to
be male and nonwhite (p < 0.05) and those with frailty were more likely to be
older and married (p < 0.05). Controlling for demographic variables, those with
frailty had the highest number of inpatient days while those with ESRD had the
highest number of outpatient visits. Non-married status was associated with more 
inpatient days, especially among younger decedents.
CONCLUSION: As a recognized leader in end-of-life care, the VHA can play a unique
role in the development of specific interventions that address the diverse needs 
of persons with different dying trajectories identified through this research.

DOI: 10.1089/jpm.2006.0256 
PMID: 17985970  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


454. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2007 Nov;18(11):2960-7. Epub 2007 Oct 17.

Significance of frailty among dialysis patients.

Johansen KL(1), Chertow GM, Jin C, Kutner NG.

Author information: 
(1)Nephrology Section, San Francisco VA Medical Center, San Francisco, CA 94121, 
USA. kirsten.johansen@ucsf.edu

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2007020221 
PMID: 17942958  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Home Health Care Serv Q. 2007;26(3):39-60.

Aging in place? Evidence that a state Medicaid waiver program helps frail older
persons avoid institutionalization.

Pande A(1), Laditka SB, Laditka JN, Davis D.

Author information: 
(1)University of South Carolina, Arnold School of Public Health, 800 Sumter St,
Health Sciences Bldg, Columbia, SC 29208, USA.

Long-term care will increasingly shift from institutions to home and community
based services. Using data from a Medicaid home care waiver program in South
Carolina, the Community Long-Term Care (CLTC) program, we evaluated differences
in frailty and service use among CLTC clients between 1995 (n = 3,748) and 2005
(n = 9,157). The expectation was that CLTC clients had become more frail in that 
period, and had greater access to services in the community, results that might
suggest the CLTC program had helped individuals to avoid institutionalization.
Frailty measures included acute and chronic conditions, other health conditions, 
and activities of daily living (ADL). We evaluated the percentage of clients
using services, and service use intensity. A large majority of clients in both
years were impaired in at least four ADL. In 2005, CLTC clients were
significantly more likely to have chronic conditions, including hypertension,
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, Alzheimer's disease, arthritis, diabetes, 
and renal failure (all p < 0.05). Clients were significantly more likely to
receive specific services in 2005, including physical therapy, dialysis, and
oxygen (all p < 0.05). Results suggest CLTC participants were more frail in 2005 
than in 1995. This may reflect a successful effort to help individuals age in
place in the community, delaying institutionalization. States may be able to
control increases in Medicaid long-term care costs through home care programs
that delay institutionalization.

DOI: 10.1300/J027v26n03_03 
PMID: 17804352  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2006 Nov;1(6):1197-204. Epub 2006 Aug 30.

Falls and fall-related injuries in older dialysis patients.

Cook WL(1), Tomlinson G, Donaldson M, Markowitz SN, Naglie G, Sobolev B, Jassal
SV.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Geriatric Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Vancouver Coastal Health 
Research Institute, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, 
Canada.

Comment in
    Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2011 Dec;6(12):2729-31.

Dialysis patients are increasingly older and more disabled. In community-dwelling
seniors without kidney disease, falls commonly predict hospitalization, the onset
of frailty, and the need for institutional care. Effective fall prevention
strategies are available. On the basis of retrospective data, it was hypothesized
that the fall rates of older (> or =65 yr) chronic outpatient hemodialysis (HD)
patients would be higher than published rates for community-dwelling seniors (0.6
to 0.8 falls/patient-year). It also was hypothesized that risk factors for falls 
in dialysis outpatients would include polypharmacy, dialysis-related hypotension,
cognitive impairment, and decreased functional status. Using a prospective cohort
study design, HD patients who were > or =65 yr of age at a large academic
dialysis unit were recruited. All study participants underwent baseline screening
for fall risk factors. Patients were followed prospectively for a minimum of 1
yr. Falls were identified through biweekly patient interviews in the HD unit. A
total of 162 patients (mean age 74.7 yr) were recruited; 57% were male. A total
of 305 falls occurred in 76 (47%) patients over 190.5 person-years of follow-up
(fall-incidence 1.60 falls/person-year). Injuries occurred in 19% of falls; 41
patients had multiple falls. Associated risk factors included age, comorbidity,
mean predialysis systolic BP, and a history of falls. In the HD population, the
fall risk is higher than in the general community, and fall-related morbidity is 
high. Better identification of HD patients who are at risk for falls and targeted
fall intervention strategies are required.

DOI: 10.2215/CJN.01650506 
PMID: 17699348  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Mayo Clin Proc. 2007 Aug;82(8):958-66.

Anemia in the elderly: how should we define it, when does it matter, and what can
be done?

Steensma DP(1), Tefferi A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Mayo Clinic, Mayo Clinic, 200 First Street SW,
Rochester, MN 55905, USA. steensma.david@mayo.edu

Comment in
    Mayo Clin Proc. 2008 Mar;83(3):368-9; author reply 369.

Anemia signifies an underlying disease and is associated with poor clinical
outcomes. In elderly patients, in whom anemia has a high prevalence (greater than
10 percent), neither the hemoglobin threshold for concern nor the identity of the
anemia-causing disease is easily established. This is an important shortfall,
because even mild anemia can compromise patient well-being and survival,
regardless of the underlying cause. This review discusses definitions of "normal"
hemoglobin levels in adults, common causes of anemia in people aged 65 years and 
older (eg, nutritional deficiency, renal insufficiency, inflammatory disorders,
and myelodysplastic syndrome), and potential consequences of anemia in elderly
patients (eg, poorer cognitive status, increased frailty, and an elevated risk of
hospitalization and of complications during hospitalization). We also outline a
practical initial diagnostic approach that helps determine appropriate treatment,
and we weigh therapeutic options in light of new safety concerns regarding
erythropoiesis-stimulating agents.

DOI: 10.4065/82.8.958 
PMID: 17673065  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Semin Dial. 2007 Jul-Aug;20(4):309-15.

Renal osteodystrophy, phosphate homeostasis, and vascular calcification.

Hruska KA(1), Saab G, Mathew S, Lund R.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Division, Departments of Pediatrics and Medicine, Washington University,
St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA. hruska_k@kids.wustl.edu

New advances in the pathogenesis of renal osteodystrophy (ROD) change the
perspective from which many of its features and treatment are viewed. Calcium,
phosphate, parathyroid hormone (PTH), and vitamin D have been shown to be
important determinants of survival associated with kidney diseases. Now ROD
dependent and independent of these factors is linked to survival more than just
skeletal frailty. This review focuses on recent discoveries that renal injury
impairs skeletal anabolism decreasing the osteoblast compartment of the skeleton 
and consequent bone formation. This discovery and the discovery that PTH
regulates the hematopoietic stem cell niche alters our view of secondary
hyperparathyroidism in chronic kidney disease (CKD) from that of a disease to
that of a necessary adaptation to renal injury that goes awry. Furthermore, ROD
is shown to be an underappreciated factor in the level of the serum phosphorus in
CKD. The discovery and the elucidation of the mechanism of hyperphosphatemia as a
cardiovascular risk in CKD change the view of ROD. It is now recognized as more
than a skeletal disorder, it is an important component of the mortality of CKD
that can be treated.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1525-139X.2007.00300.x 
PMID: 17635820  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2006 Apr;15(4):377-87.

Therapeutic potential of the SARMs: revisiting the androgen receptor for drug
discovery.

Segal S(1), Narayanan R, Dalton JT.

Author information: 
(1)1GTx, Inc., Memphis, TN 38163, USA.

Selective androgen receptor modulators (SARMS) bind to the androgen receptor and 
demonstrate anabolic activity in a variety of tissues; however, unlike
testosterone and other anabolic steroids, these nonsteroidal agents are able to
induce bone and muscle growth, as well as shrinking the prostate. The potential
of SARMS is to maximise the positive attributes of steroidal androgens as well as
minimising negative effects, thus providing therapeutic opportunities in a
variety of diseases, including muscle wasting associated with burns, cancer,
end-stage renal disease, osteoporosis, frailty and hypogonadism. This review
summarises androgen physiology, the current status of the R&D of SARMS and
potential therapeutic indications for this emerging class of drugs.

DOI: 10.1517/13543784.15.4.377	 
PMID: 16548787  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Cancer J. 2005 Nov-Dec;11(6):449-60.

Physiologic aspects of aging: impact on cancer management and decision making,
part I.

Sawhney R(1), Sehl M, Naeim A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology and Geriatrics, David Geffen School of
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095-1687, USA.

A gradual diminution in the physiologic reserve or functional capacity over time 
is the characteristic hallmark of aging, and this has a direct impact on the
choice of cancer therapy and its toxicity profile in elderly patients with
cancer. With the expected rapid rise of the older population as a subgroup,
oncologists will increasingly treat elderly patients. Provision of competent care
to this increasing pool of older patients with cancer necessitates that oncology 
professionals become familiar with age-associated changes in organ physiology and
their impact on cancer treatment and toxicity. In this comprehensive review, we
have listed changes in cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, pulmonary, and renal
physiology with aging. Also enumerated is the impact of these changes on cancer
therapy and toxicity in each organ system-based section. Cardiovascular changes
primarily lead to reduction of the cardiac functional reserve, with a consequent 
increase in the risk of congestive heart failure. Changes in gastrointestinal
physiology lead to increased mucosal damage. A reduction in pulmonary reserve has
implications for postradiation complications, and a decline in renal function
leads to an increased potential for nephrotoxicity. These changes impair the
ability of older patients with cancer to tolerate cancer therapy and increase
their risk of toxicities. This may lead to an overall decline in functional
status, resulting frailty, poor quality of life, and ultimately poor outcomes.
Becoming familiar with age-related physiologic changes is the first step for
oncologists seeking to better tailor their treatments. This, combined with
adoption of some of the clinical interventions suggested in this review, can help
better manage the geriatric oncology patient. Further research is necessary for
the development of more specific evidence-based recommendations.


PMID: 16393479  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Int Urol Nephrol. 2005;37(3):649-52.

Prevalence of falls among seniors maintained on hemodialysis.

Cook WL(1), Jassal SV.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Geriatric Medicine, Department of Medicine and Providence Health
Care, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Increasing numbers of seniors are starting renal replacement therapy.
Many may experience a loss of functional independence including mobility
impairment. Seniors on dialysis commonly have multiple comorbidities that are
associated with an increased risk for falls in the general population. Falls lead
to serious injury, loss of independence, hospitalization and
institutionalization. Despite such morbidity, little attention has been directed 
toward this marker of frailty in the dialysis population. In this brief
preliminary report, we set out to determine the prevalence of falls among seniors
on dialysis.
METHODS: A cross-sectional interview based survey was used to determine one year 
fall prevalence in patients aged 65 years and older receiving in center
hemodialysis therapy.
RESULTS: A total of 135 ambulatory seniors were interviewed. Thirty-seven (27%)
people reported having fallen in the past 12 months. An additional 21(16%)
reported a fall prior to the past year. Four percent recalled a fall associated
fracture or head injury requiring treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Falls are very common amongst seniors on hemodialysis. Further
prospective study of the incidence and risk factors for falls in this population 
is needed to allow targeted interventions.

DOI: 10.1007/s11255-005-0396-9 
PMID: 16307356  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Arch Intern Med. 2005 Oct 24;165(19):2214-20.

A prospective study of anemia status, hemoglobin concentration, and mortality in 
an elderly cohort: the Cardiovascular Health Study.

Zakai NA(1), Katz R, Hirsch C, Shlipak MG, Chaves PH, Newman AB, Cushman M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Vermont College of Medicine and Fletcher
Allen Health Care, Burlington, USA.

Comment in
    Arch Intern Med. 2005 Oct 24;165(19):2187-9.

BACKGROUND: Anemia is viewed as a negative prognostic factor in the elderly
population; its independent impact on survival is unclear.
METHODS: Baseline hemoglobin quintiles and anemia, as defined by the World Health
Organization criteria, were assessed in relation to mortality in the
Cardiovascular Health Study, a prospective cohort study with 11.2 years of
follow-up of 5888 community-dwelling men and women 65 years or older, enrolled in
1989-1990 or 1992-1993 in 4 US communities.
RESULTS: A total of 1205 participants were in the lowest hemoglobin quintile
(<13.7 g/dL for men; <12.6 g/dL for women), and 498 (8.5%) were anemic (<13 g/dL 
for men; <12 g/dL for women). A reverse J-shaped relationship with mortality was 
observed; age-, sex-, and race-adjusted hazard ratios (95% confidence interval
[CI]) in the first and fifth quintiles, compared with the fourth quintile, were
1.42 (95% CI, 1.25-1.62) and 1.24 (95% CI, 1.09-1.42). After multivariate
adjustment, these hazard ratios were 1.33 (95% CI, 1.15-1.54) and 1.17 (95% CI,
1.01-1.36). The demographic- and fully-adjusted hazard ratios of anemia for
mortality were 1.57 (95% CI, 1.38-1.78) and 1.38 (95% CI, 1.19-1.54). Adjustment 
for causes and consequences of anemia (renal function, inflammation, or frailty) 
did not reduce associations.
CONCLUSIONS: Lower and higher hemoglobin concentrations and anemia by World
Health Organization criteria were independently associated with increased
mortality. The World Health Organization criteria did not identify risk as well
as a lower hemoglobin value. Additional study is needed on the clinically valid
definition for and causes of anemia in the elderly and on the increased mortality
at the extremes of hemoglobin concentrations.

DOI: 10.1001/archinte.165.19.2214 
PMID: 16246985  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Z Rheumatol. 2005 Oct;64(7):467-72.

[Pharmacological treatment of osteoarthritis in the elderly].

[Article in German]

Brabant T(1), Stichtenoth D.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Geriatrie und Frührehabilitation, Krankenhaus St. Joseph-Stift
Schwachhauser, Heerstr. 54, 28209 Bremen. tbrabant@sjs-bremen.de

Osteoarthritis (OA) is the most common cause of functional disability in the
elderly. Pain and loss of motion induce a vicious circle, leading to instability,
frailty and ultimately invalidity. Currently, there is no treatment to reverse or
slow the disease progression to a clinically meaningful extent. Thus, the primary
goal of OA treatment in the elderly is pain relief and preservation of joint
function. For this, pharmacological, non-pharmacological and if necessary
surgical treatment regimes must form an integrated concept. However, the real
challenge is polymorbidity and other age-related or age-associated factors, which
influence the course of disease and its therapy unfavorably. The changes in
pharmacokinetics and -dynamics in the elderly can be compensated for the
nonopioid and opioid-analgesics by the well known "start low, go slow" approach. 
More problematic are non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), which are
most often used for symptomatic treatment of OA: Patients over 65 have an
enhanced susceptibility to the gastrointestinal and renal side effects of NSAIDs;
all NSAIDs, not only coxibs, increase the cardiovascular risk in patients with
such a disease; number and severity of drug interactions is elevated due to
age-associated polypharmacy. Thus, NSAIDs, including coxibs, should be used with 
great caution for treatment of OA in the elderly.

DOI: 10.1007/s00393-005-0778-5 
PMID: 16244830  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Drugs Aging. 2005;22(5):375-92.

Predicting and preventing adverse drug reactions in the very old.

Merle L(1), Laroche ML, Dantoine T, Charmes JP.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Pharmacologie, Toxicologie, Centre Régional de Pharmacovigilance,
CHU Dupuytren, Limoges, France. louis.merle@chu-limoges.fr

The size of the elderly population has been increasing steadily for several
years. Individuals in this age group often have several concomitant diseases that
require treatment with multiple medications. These drugs, for various reasons and
especially as a consequence of potential accumulation, may be associated with
adverse reactions. Of the numerous factors that can favour the occurrence of
these adverse drug reactions, the most important are the pathophysiological
consequences of aging, particularly as these apply to the very old. Although
absorption of drugs is not usually reduced in the elderly, diffusion,
distribution and particularly elimination decline with age. Furthermore, while
hepatic metabolic function is fairly normal, renal function is usually markedly
depressed in very old individuals, and this can translate into clinical
consequences if it is not taken into account. This is why, before administration 
of any drug in the elderly, evaluation of glomerular filtration rate is
essential. Validated estimations such as those obtained from the classical
Cockcroft-Gault formula or from more recent methodologies are required. In
addition to reductions in various organ functions, factors connected with very
old age such as frailty, falls, abnormal sensitivity to medications and
polypathology, all of which tend to be more common in the last years of life, all
directly impact on adverse drug reaction occurrence. Given these characteristics 
of the elderly population, the best way to reduce the prevalence of adverse drug 
reactions in this group is to limit drug prescription to essential medications,
make sure that use of prescribed agents is clearly explained to the patient, give
drugs for as short a period as possible, and periodically re-evaluate all use of 
drugs in the elderly.

DOI: 10.2165/00002512-200522050-00003 
PMID: 15903351  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Am J Geriatr Pharmacother. 2004 Dec;2(4):274-302.

Pharmacokinetics in older persons.

Cusack BJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Gerontology and Pharmacology Research Unit, VA Medical Center, Boise, Idaho
83702, USA. barry.cusack@med.va.gov

BACKGROUND: Physiologic changes and disease-related alterations in organ function
occur with aging. These changes can affect drug pharmacokinetics in older
persons.
OBJECTIVE: This article reviews age-related changes in pharmacokinetics and their
clinical relevance.
METHODS: A PubMed search was conducted using the terms elderly and
pharmacokinetics. Other reviews were also included for literature searching. The 
review includes literature in particular from 1990 through April 2004. Some
articles from before 1990 were included to help illustrate principles of
age-related pharmacokinetics.
RESULTS: There are minor changes in drug absorption with aging. The effect of
aging on small-bowel transporter systems is not yet fully established.
Bioavailability of highly extracted drugs often is increased with age.
Transdermal absorption may be delayed, especially in the case of water-soluble
compounds. Fat-soluble drugs may distribute more widely and water-soluble drugs
less extensively in older persons. Hepatic drug metabolism shows wide
interindividual variation, and in many cases, there is an age-related decline in 
elimination of metabolized drugs, particularly those eliminated by the cytochrome
enzyme system. Any decrement in cytochrome enzyme metabolism appears
nonselective. Synthetic conjugation metabolism is less affected by age.
Pseudocapillarization of the sinusoidal endothelium in the liver, restricting
oxygen diffusion, and the decline in liver size and liver blood flow may
influence age-related changes in rate of hepatic metabolism. Frailty,
physiological stress, and illness are important predictors of drug metabolism in 
older individuals. Inhibition of drug metabolism is not altered with aging, but
induction is reduced in a minority of studies. Renal drug elimination typically
declines with age, commensurate with the fall in creatinine clearance. Renal
tubular organic acid transport may decline with age, while the function of the
organic base transporter is preserved but may be less responsive to stimulation.
CONCLUSION: Changes in pharmacokinetics occur due to age-related physiologic
perturbations. These changes contribute to altered dose requirements in older
persons, particularly in the case of drugs eliminated by the kidney.
Interindividual variation, disease, frailty, and stress may overshadow
age-related changes.


PMID: 15903286  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Biostatistics. 2005 Jul;6(3):404-19. Epub 2005 Apr 14.

Analysis of clustered recurrent event data with application to hospitalization
rates among renal failure patients.

Schaubel DE(1), Cai J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2029,
USA. deschau@umich.edu

End-stage renal disease (commonly referred to as renal failure) is of increasing 
concern in the United States and many countries worldwide. Incidence rates have
increased, while the supply of donor organs has not kept pace with the demand.
Although renal transplantation has generally been shown to be superior to
dialysis with respect to mortality, very little research has been directed
towards comparing transplant and wait-list patients with respect to morbidity.
Using national data from the Scientific Registry of Transplant Recipients, we
compare transplant and wait-list hospitalization rates. Hospitalizations are
subject to two levels of dependence. In addition to the dependence among
within-patient events, patients are also clustered by listing center. We propose 
two marginal methods to analyze such clustered recurrent event data; the first
model postulates a common baseline event rate, while the second features
cluster-specific baseline rates. Our results indicate that kidney transplantation
offers a significant decrease in hospitalization, but that the effect is negated 
by a waiting time (until transplant) of more than 2 years. Moreover, graft
failure (GF) results in a significant increase in the hospitalization rate which 
is greatest in the first month post-GF, but remains significantly elevated up to 
4 years later. We also compare results from the proposed models to those based on
a frailty model, with the various methods compared and contrasted.

DOI: 10.1093/biostatistics/kxi018 
PMID: 15831581  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Expert Opin Drug Saf. 2005 Jan;4(1):7-18.

Drug interactions with angiotensin receptor blockers.

Böhler S(1), Pittrow D, Bramlage P, Kirch W.

Author information: 
(1)Technical University of Dresden, Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Medical
Faculty Carl Gustav Carus, Fiedlerstrasse 27, D-01307 Dresden, Germany.
steffen.boehler@mailbox.tu-dresden.de

Comment in
    Expert Opin Drug Saf. 2005 Jan;4(1):139-40.

Many patients with high blood pressure receive multiple medications for
hypertension and other conditions, placing them at risk for adverse drug
interactions. Additionally, as the prevalence of hypertension increases with age,
factors like greater frailty, comorbidity of the elderly requiring polypharmacy, 
and reduced hepatic and renal clearance rates for the elimination of drugs
increase the likelihood of drug interactions. Angiotensin receptor blockers
(ARBs) are the most recent class of agents for the treatment of hypertension. Due
to a favourable side effect profile, this class of drugs deserves increased
attention. This article reviews drug interactions of ARBs and suggests measures
for reducing the risk of adverse events when drugs are co-administered. MEDLINE, 
EMBASE, Cochrane library, and CINAHL were searched. Reported and likely clinical 
relevant interactions of ARBs with concomitantly given drugs are summarised in
Table 2 and 3. Compared to other classes of antihypertensive agents, the ARBs
appear to have a low potential for drug interactions; however, interactions with 
this class occur and variations within the class have been detected, mainly due
to different affinities for cytochrome P450 isoenzymes.


PMID: 15709894  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Biometrics. 2004 Dec;60(4):892-9.

Joint modeling of longitudinal and survival data via a common frailty.

Ratcliffe SJ(1), Guo W, Ten Have TR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, Blockley Hall, 6th Floor, 423 Guardian Drive, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104-6021, USA. sratclif@cceb.upenn.edu

We develop a joint model for the analysis of longitudinal and survival data in
the presence of data clustering. We use a mixed effects model for the repeated
measures that incorporates both subject- and cluster-level random effects, with
subjects nested within clusters. A Cox frailty model is used for the survival
model in order to accommodate the clustering. We then link the two responses via 
the common cluster-level random effects, or frailties. This model allows us to
simultaneously evaluate the effect of covariates on the two types of responses,
while accounting for both the relationship between the responses and data
clustering. The model was motivated by a study of end-stage renal disease
patients undergoing hemodialysis, where we wished to evaluate the effect of iron 
treatment on both the patients' hemoglobin levels and survival times, with the
patients clustered by enrollment site.

DOI: 10.1111/j.0006-341X.2004.00244.x 
PMID: 15606409  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


469. G Ital Nefrol. 2004 Nov-Dec;21(6):554-60.

[Frail elderly in hemodialysis].

[Article in Italian]

Panzetta G(1), Grignetti M, Sceusa R, Toigo G.

Author information: 
(1)S.C. di Nefrologia e Dialisi, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Ospedali
Riuniti di Trieste, Trieste. giovanni.panzetta@aots.sanita.fvg.it

A new category of patients aged >75 yrs, namely the elderly, is now being freely 
admitted to hemodialysis (HD) and this category is becoming predominant. The
absence of systematic studies makes this patient category almost
indistinguishable from other categories, even though its peculiarity is now
evident. At least 30-40% of individuals in this age bracket are expected to be
dependent and/or frail, but the incidence of frailty is likely to be higher in
the elderly undergoing HD. Due to severe physical and/or mental impairment and
often because of strong social hardships, these patients rarely experience
clinical stability and are dependent on third parties for their survival. Their
care produces complex problems for welfare services and this has proved
responsible for modifying the organization of renal care units. These repeated
patient admissions to hospital are filling nephrology facilities, and the
dialysis management -- mainly concerning outpatients -- requires a much greater
use of facilities and staff than normal if compared to average dialysis patients.
In 112 elderly patients consecutively admitted to the dialysis program over a
period of 10 yrs, we identified 35 dependent or frail patients (31.2%), even
taking into consideration only extreme degrees of infirmity. Dependence proved to
be the only clinical parameter associated with survival (mortality at 6 months
23.6 vs. 10.6%, p<0.01; Kaplan-Meier survival curves, p<0.03 log-rank test),
while comorbidities -- in particular cardiovascular -- that usually affect
dialysis mortality rates, did not seem to be discriminating risk factors in the
elderly. More precisely, with the confirmation of these data through wider case
studies, the idea will be reinforced that, also in dialysis, the elderly must be 
constantly monitored for dependence and frailty, as is the case in any
exclusively geriatric field. Prevention, as well as a therapeutic approach
specifically modeled on these conditions, could help to improve the prognosis of 
this patient category, which is particularly difficult to deal with and is
becoming predominant in dialysis units.


PMID: 15593023  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Stat Med. 2004 Jul 15;23(13):2089-107.

A test for informative censoring in clustered survival data.

Huang X(1), Wolfe RA, Hu C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics, M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, The University of
Texas, Houston 77030, USA. xlhuang@mdanderson.org

Frailty models are frequently used to analyse clustered survival data. The
assumption of non-informative censoring is commonly used by these models, even
though it may not be true in many situations. This article proposes a test for
this assumption. It uses the estimated correlation between two types of
martingale residuals, one from a model for failure and the other from a model for
censoring. It distinguishes two types of censoring, namely withdrawal and the end
of the study. Simulation studies show that the proposed test works well under
various scenarios. For illustration, the test is applied to a data set for kidney
disease patients from multiple dialysis centres.

Copyright 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/sim.1801 
PMID: 15211605  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Am J Kidney Dis. 2004 May;43(5):861-7.

The presence of frailty in elderly persons with chronic renal insufficiency.

Shlipak MG(1), Stehman-Breen C, Fried LF, Song X, Siscovick D, Fried LP, Psaty
BM, Newman AB.

Author information: 
(1)Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California, San Francisco,
General Internal Medicine Section, Medical Service, San Francisco Veterans
Affairs Medical Center San Francisco, CA 94121, USA. shlip@itsa.ucsf.edu

BACKGROUND: Frailty has been defined as a tool to define individuals who lack
functional reserve and are at risk for functional decline. We hypothesized that
chronic renal insufficiency (CRI) would be associated with a greater prevalence
of frailty and disability in the elderly.
METHODS: This cross-sectional analysis used baseline data collected from the
Cardiovascular Health Study, which enrolled 5,888 community-dwelling adults aged 
65 years or older from 4 clinical centers in the United States. Renal
insufficiency is defined as a serum creatinine level of 1.3 mg/dL or greater (>
or =115 micromol/L) in women and 1.5 mg/dL or greater (> or =133 micromol/L) in
men. Frailty is defined by the presence of 3 of the following abnormalities:
unintentional weight loss, self-reported exhaustion, measured weakness, slow
walking speed, and low physical activity. Disability is defined as any
self-reported difficulty with activities of daily living.
RESULTS: Among 5,808 participants with creatinine levels measured at entry, 15.9%
of men (n = 394) and 7.6% of women (n = 254) had CRI. Prevalences of frailty (15%
versus 6%; P < 0.001) and disability (12% versus 7%; P = 0.001) were greater in
participants with CRI compared with those with normal renal function. After
multivariate adjustment for comorbidity, CRI remained significantly associated
with frailty (odds ratio, 1.76; 95% confidence interval, 1.28 to 2.41), but not
disability (odds ratio, 1.26; 95% confidence interval, 0.94 to 1.69).
CONCLUSION: Elderly persons with CRI have a high prevalence of frailty, which may
signal their risk for progression to adverse health outcomes. If confirmed in
other studies, identification of frailty in patients with CRI may warrant special
interventions to preserve their independence, quality of life, and survival.


PMID: 15112177  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2004 Mar;60(1):45-9. Epub 2004 Feb 7.

Laxative treatment elevates plasma homocysteine: a study on a population-based
Swedish sample of old people.

Nilsson SE(1), Takkinen S, Johansson B, Dotevall G, Melander A, Berg S, McClearn 
G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Gerontology, School of Health Sciences, Jönköping University,
Sweden.

OBJECTIVES: Elevated plasma homocysteine might indicate an increased risk of
cancer, and cardiovascular and neurological diseases. The homocysteine level
depends on the supply of folate and cobalamine, and constipation and/or laxative 
treatment might compromise this supply. The present study examined the impact of 
constipation and laxative treatment on the blood levels of homocysteine, folate
and cobalamine in a population-based sample of aged people, including
consideration of frailty and impaired renal function, both of which may also
influence the homocysteine level.
METHODS: The study was based on biochemical tests in 341 females and 183 males
aged 82 years or older. The concentrations of homocysteine (plasma), folate,
cobalamine and urea (serum) were measured in subjects with and without ongoing
treatment with laxative drugs. Values were adjusted for age, gender and frailty, 
as well as for clinical diagnoses and drug therapies known to affect homocysteine
levels.
RESULTS: Homocysteine levels were increased and those of folate reduced in aged
subjects on laxatives. Homocysteine remained elevated after adjusting for frailty
and various neurological disorders. There was no significant effect on
homocysteine and folate in constipated subjects without laxatives.

DOI: 10.1007/s00228-003-0721-0 
PMID: 14767628  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Int J Qual Health Care. 2003 Jun;15(3):189-96.

Survival of hemodialysis patients: modeling differences in risk of dialysis
centers.

Sá Carvalho M(1), Henderson R, Shimakura S, Sousa IP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK.
carvalho@procc.fiocruz.br

OBJECTIVE: Dialysis is the most common renal replacement therapy for patients
with end stage renal disease. This paper considers survival of dialysis patients,
aiming to assess quality of renal replacement therapy at dialysis centers in Rio 
de Janeiro, Brazil, and to investigate differences in survival between health
facilities.
METHODS: A Cox proportional hazards model, allowing for time-varying covariates
and prevalent data, was the basic method used to analyze the survival of 11,579
patients on hemodialysis in 67 health facilities in Rio de Janeiro State from
January 1998 until August 2001, using data obtained from routine information
systems. A frailty random effects model was applied to investigate differences in
mortality between health centers not explained by measured characteristics.
RESULTS: The individual variables associated with the outcome were age and
underlying disease, with diabetes being the main isolated risk factor.
Considering covariates of the health unit, two factors were associated with
performance: bigger units had on average better survival times than smaller ones 
and units which offered cyclic peritoneal dialysis performed less well than those
that did not. There were significant frailty effects among centers, with relative
risks varying between 0.24 and 3.15, and an estimated variance of 0.43.
CONCLUSIONS: Routine assessment based on health registries of the outcome of any 
high technology medical treatment is extremely important in maintaining quality
of care and in estimating the impact of changes in therapies, units, and patient 
profiles. The frailty model allowed estimation of variation in risk between
centers not attributable to any measured covariates. This can be used to guide
more specific investigation and changes in health policies related to renal
transplant therapies.


PMID: 12803346  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Biometrics. 2002 Sep;58(3):510-20.

A frailty model for informative censoring.

Huang X(1), Wolfe RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor 48109-2029,
USA. xueling@umich.edu

To account for the correlation between failure and censoring, we propose a new
frailty model for clustered data. In this model, the risk to be censored is
affected by the risk of failure. This model allows flexibility in the direction
and degree of dependence between failure and censoring. It includes the
traditional frailty model as a special case. It allows censoring by some causes
to be analyzed as informative while treating censoring by other causes as
noninformative. It can also analyze data for competing risks. To fit the model,
the EM algorithm is used with Markov chain Monte Carlo simulations in the
E-steps. Simulation studies and analysis of data for kidney disease patients are 
provided. Consequences of incorrectly assuming noninformative censoring are
investigated.


PMID: 12229985  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


475. G Ital Nefrol. 2002 May-Jun;19(3):350-2.

[One hundred years old and under haemodialysis treatment for 5 years...a case to 
ponder].

[Article in Italian]

Di Benedetto A(1), Buono A, Cappabianca F, Marinelli G.

Author information: 
(1)Fresenius Medical Care Italia, Napoli. attilio.dibenedetto@fmc-ag.com

BACKGROUND: The average age of the patients, introduced in the dialytic
programme, is progressively increasing in relation to the prolonging of life and 
to the technological progresses. All this places the nephrologist to ask himself 
if the age has to be considered a limiting factor for the introduction of a
patient in the dialytic programme.
CASE REPORT: We report on a patient who started her dialytic programme when she
was 95. After 5 years, at the age of 100, she uneventfully completed 60 months of
haemodialytic treatment. Right from the start we decided to use as vascular
access a double Tesio catheter, which was never replaced because it was the most 
appropriate for the patient's age. During the follow-up period the patient was
not hospitalised and her clinical condition was satisfactory.
DISCUSSION: According to the latest epidemiological and clinical data, this case 
emphasises the concept that it would be wrong to refuse the haemodialytic
treatment to such patients only because of their frailty. Moreover, the lack of
either univocal prognostic indications, based on scientific criteria, or special 
national laws confirm that the decision to treat the patient depends exclusively 
on the physician's ethical and professional background as well as the patient's
autonomy and conscience.


PMID: 12195404  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Int Urol Nephrol. 2001;32(3):469-74.

Geriatric nephrology units: the way of the future.

Jassal SV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, University of Liverpool, UK.
Vanita.Jassal@uhn.on.ca

The emergence of the sub-speciality geriatric nephrology is an exciting
development for the future. The main objectives should be to maximise patient
independence and minimise deterioration and learn dependent behaviour in this
population. To achieve these goals a holistic approach needs to be taken, to the 
patient, their environment and the efficacy of such units, and this can only be
achieved using a multi-disciplinary team approach. In the creation of a geriatric
nephrology unit it is important to identify the factors that cause frailty and,
if possible, modify or prevent the initial decline using nutritional and other
interventions. This requires careful monitoring, not only using the traditional
markers of renal disease including urea and creatinine, but also using
instruments that measure functional ability. These issues are discussed under the
headings prevention, documentation and planning.


PMID: 11583373  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


477. J Epidemiol Biostat. 2000;5(3):169-75.

The use of frailty models in genetic studies: application to the relationship
between end-stage renal failure and mutation type in Alport syndrome. European
Community Alport Syndrome Concerted Action Group (ECASCA).

Albert I(1), Jais JP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biostatistique et d'Information Médicale, Hôpital
Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: Alport syndrome (AS) is a severe hereditary disease usually
transmitted as an X dominant trait and involving a mutation of the COL4A5 gene.
It leads to end-stage renal failure (ESRF), but this progression is
heterogeneous. Mutations of the COL4A5 gene have been characterised in numerous
families using molecular biology. Our objective was to evaluate the interfamilial
heterogeneity of the disease and to study relationships between mutation types
and progression to ESRF in the European Community Alport Syndrome Concerted
Action group (ECASCA) registry database.
METHODS: We used the frailty model framework. Frailty models have been developed 
to analyse censored data with non-independent observations. Random effects are
introduced in a Cox proportional regression model to take into account the
intracluster correlations. In this study, ESRF is considered a censored event and
the intrafamilial correlations are taken into account in the frailty models.
RESULTS: These approaches allow us to demonstrate the existence of an
interfamilial heterogeneity; the role of the mutation type explains the
interfamilial variability. In particular, the results suggest that some mutation 
types are associated with a higher risk of ESRF for males.
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows the importance of characterising the mutation at
the molecular level in genetic studies, to understand the relationship between
genotype and phenotype. The frailty models constitute an attractive approach in
this context, when the phenotype is characterised by a censored end-point.


PMID: 11051113  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Rev Epidemiol Sante Publique. 1999 Dec;47(6):545-54.

[Methodology for analyzing censored correlated data: application of marginal and 
frailty approaches in human genetics. The European Community Alport Syndrome
Concerted Action Group (ECASCA)].

[Article in French]

Albert I(1), Jais JP.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Biostatistique et d'Informatique Médicale, CHU Necker-Enfants
Malades, 149, rue de Sèvres, 75743 Paris Cedex 15. albert@necker.fr

BACKGROUND: Statistical analysis for correlated censored data allows to study
censored events in clustered structure designs. Considering a possible
correlation among failure times of the same group, standard methodology is no
longer applicable. We investigated proposed models in this context to study
familial data about a genetic disease, Alport syndrome. Alport syndrome is a
severe hereditary disease due to abnormal collagenous chains. Renal failure is
the main symptom of the disease. It progresses toward end-stage renal failure
(IRT) according to a high time variability. As shown by genetic studies,
mutations of COL4A5 gene are involved in the X-linked Alport Syndrome. Due to the
large range of the mutation types, the aim of this study was to search for a
possible genetic origin of the heterogeneity of the disease severity.
METHODS: Marginal survival models and mixed effects survival models (so-called
frailty models) were proposed to take into account the possible non independence 
of the observations. In this study, time until end-stage renal failure is a
rightly censored end point. Possible intra-familial correlations due to shared
environmental and/or genetic factors could induce dependence among familial
failure times. In this paper, we fit marginal and frailty proportional hazards
models to evaluate the effect of mutation type on the risk of IRT and an
interfamilial heterogeneity of failure times.
RESULTS: In this study, the use of these models allows to show the presence of an
interfamilial heterogeneity of the failure times to IRT. Moreover, the results
suggest that some mutation types are linked to a higher risk of fast evolution to
IRT, which explains partially the interfamilial heterogeneity of the failure
times.
CONCLUSIONS: This paper shows the interest of marginal and frailty models to
evaluate the heterogeneity of censored responses and to study relationships
between a censored criterion and covariables. This study puts forward the
importance of characterizing the mutation at a molecular level to understand the 
relationship between genotype and phenotype.


PMID: 10673588  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Br J Nutr. 1999 Mar;81(3):191-201.

Plasma pyridoxal phosphate and pyridoxic acid and their relationship to plasma
homocysteine in a representative sample of British men and women aged 65 years
and over.

Bates CJ(1), Pentieva KD, Prentice A, Mansoor MA, Finch S.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Human Nutrition Research, Cambridge, UK. Chris.Bates@mrc-hnr.cam.ac.uk

Comment in
    Br J Nutr. 1999 Mar;81(3):175-6.

Concentrations of pyridoxal phosphate and pyridoxic acid were measured in fasting
plasma samples from British men and women aged 65 years and over, participating
in a National Diet and Nutrition Survey during 1994-5, selected to be
representative of the population of mainland Britain. In this population, the
concentration of pyridoxal phosphate declined, whereas pyridoxic acid rose, with 
increasing age and frailty; however, both status indicators were strongly and
directly (with a positive coefficient) correlated with estimates of vitamin B6
intake. This was little affected by the inclusion of food energy and protein
intakes in the model. Forty-eight percent of the participants living in the
community and 75% of those living in institutions had plasma pyridoxal phosphate 
concentrations below a range considered normal from other studies. In a
univariate regression model, plasma pyridoxal phosphate concentrations were
inversely correlated with plasma homocysteine concentrations, consistent with the
hypothesis that vitamin B6 status may influence plasma homocysteine levels, and
hence vascular disease risk. However, this relationship was partly attenuated in 
a multiple regression model including age, sex, domicile and biochemical status
indices, including those of folate and vitamin B12. There was evidence that
plasma pyridoxal phosphate was sensitive to metabolic conditions associated with 
inflammation and the acute-phase reaction, and that plasma pyridoxic acid was
sensitive to renal function. Thus, neither index is an ideal predictor of vitamin
B6 status in older people, unless these confounding factors are allowed for.
Since poor vitamin B6 status may have health implications, e.g. for immune
function, cognition, and for essential intermediary metabolic pathways in older
people, it needs to be investigated as a possible public health problem.


PMID: 10434845  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Adv Ren Replace Ther. 1994 Oct;1(3):210-8.

Psychosocial issues in end-stage renal disease: aging.

Kutner NG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine,
Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

Older end-stage renal disease (ESRD) patients presumably encounter multiple
stressors: the need to undergo treatment for a chronic, life-threatening illness,
age-related physical frailty and comorbidities, and exposure to psychosocial
losses related to aging. However, most studies comparing older patients
(typically patients aged 60 and older) with younger patients undergoing ESRD
therapy indicate that the psychosocial well-being reported by older patients is
at least as good as, and perhaps better than, the well-being reported by younger 
patients. These data reflect a health optimism generally characteristic of older 
persons, and ESRD patients' tendency to evaluate their functional status and
their psychosocial well-being as largely independent domains. At the same time,
availability of support from dialysis caregivers and from family members is
acknowledged as a crucial variable affecting older patients' ability to
successfully comply with treatment regimens and adjust to various ESRD therapies.
Differential psychosocial outcomes related to older patients' sociodemographic
characteristics are not well studied, but data from the United States show better
perceived physical status and psychosocial well-being among older
African-American patients than among older white patients on chronic dialysis.
Suggestions are offered for methodological and conceptual refinements of research
investigating the relation of age to psychosocial outcomes in ESRD.


PMID: 7614324  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Am J Kidney Dis. 1992 Oct;20(4):376-86.

Survival differences among older dialysis patients in the southeast.

Brogan D(1), Kutner NG, Flagg E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Emory University, Atlanta,
GA.

Older end-stage renal disease (ESRD) patients treated by chronic dialysis have
higher mortality in the United States than in many other countries. While
increasing age, white race, male sex, and/or diabetes are considered risk factors
for survival, few studies of older dialysis patients have simultaneously
considered multiple predictor variables and their interactions. Using information
contained in the 1982 to 1986 ESRD Network 20 database for Georgia and South
Carolina, we studied hospitalizations and survival of 1,354 blacks and 965 whites
who were age 60 years or older when they began dialysis therapy. Survival time
was modeled using the Cox life-table regression method. Older blacks' median age 
at dialysis initiation was 67.4, compared with 68.7 for older whites (P = 0.001).
Blacks were more likely than whites (P < 0.001) to have hypertension-related or
diabetes-related ESRD. White patients experienced approximately 25% more
hospitalization when adjustment was made for patient-days at risk. Separate
multivariate survival models were required for patients with diabetes-related
versus non-diabetes-related ESRD. Among diabetics, mortality was higher among
whites and among patients who were older when they began dialysis. Among patients
with non-diabetes-related ESRD, mortality was higher among patients who were
older when they began dialysis, but the age effect was much stronger for white
males. Our hospitalization and mortality data support the view that unmeasured
severity (or frailty) differences characterize white as compared with black
dialysis patients. Among non-diabetes-related ESRD patients, the age effect on
survival was more severe in white males than in blacks or in white females. The
high mortality we observed among older dialysis patients in Georgia and South
Carolina warrants further study; the data may in part reflect patients' lower
socioeconomic status compared with age, race, and sex-matched controls.


PMID: 1415207  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Biometrics. 1991 Jun;47(2):461-6.

Regression with frailty in survival analysis.

McGilchrist CA(1), Aisbett CW.

Author information: 
(1)University of New South Wales, Kensington, Australia.

In studies of survival, the hazard function for each individual may depend on
observed risk variables but usually not all such variables are known or
measurable. This unknown factor of the hazard function is usually termed the
individual heterogeneity or frailty. When survival is time to the occurrence of a
particular type of event and more than one such time may be obtained for each
individual, frailty is a common factor among such recurrence times. A model
including frailty is fitted to such repeated measures of recurrence times.


PMID: 1912255  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Hautarzt. 1981 Jan;32(1):23-7.

[Development of "mixed connective tissue disease" (MCTD) from discoid lupus
erythematosus].

[Article in German]

Bauer R, Schultz-Ehrenburg U, Orfanos CE.

A patient with discoid lupus erythematosus is reported which turned into a mixed 
connective tissue disease (MCTD) within five months. THe patient developed a
severe polysymptomatic clinical picture with frailty, myositis, generalized
erythema and livedo racemosa features, but without renal involvement. Combined
therapy with prednisolone and azathioprine led to rapid regression of all
symptoms. After releasing from the hospital a mitigated relapse could be
controlled by increasing the dose of cortico-steroids. No other relapse occurred 
during the following year. Since the onset of disease the indirect
immunofluorescence showed antinuclear antibodies of the speckled pattern. Also we
could mark antibodies against ENA. We regard this finding as an indication, that 
in patients with discoid lupus erythematosus and antinuclear antibodies of the
speckled pattern the risk of progressing into MCTD had to be considered. Repeated
controls for symptoms of other collagenoses, therefore, should follow for a
period of two years.


PMID: 6971860  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
